Blythe Lucero
100 MORE
SWIMMING DRILLS
• IMPROVE YOUR TECHNIQUE
• BECOME A MORE EFFICIENT SWIMMER
• AVOID INJURIES
MEYER
& MEYER
SPORT

THE AUTHOR
Blythe Lucero has been coaching swimming for more
than 25 years. She currently oversees two teams,
Berkeley Aquatic Masters and Berkeley Barracudas,
where she brings her passion for swimming to the
development and training of swimmers of all ages,
from novice to world class. Blythe grew up in Berkeley,
California, in a large athletic family. She swam
competitively in her youth, achieving All-American status in college. In
addition to coaching swimming, she trains Water Safety Instructors for
the Red Cross.
100 More Swimming Drills follows the successful Strength Training for
Faster Swimming, Technique Swim Workouts, The 100 Best Swimming
Drills and Masters Swimming – A Manual.

100 MORE SWIMMING DRILLS

This book has been very carefully prepared, but no responsibility is taken for the
correctness of the information it contains. Neither the author nor the publisher can
assume liability for any damages or injuries resulting from information contained in
this book.

100 MORE SWIMMING DRILLS
by Blythe Lucero
Dedicated to PB
Special spirit, special soul
Meyer & Meyer Sport

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
100 More Swimming Drills
Maidenhead: Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd., 2013
ISBN: 978-1-78255-001-3
All rights reserved, especially the right to copy and distribute, including the translation rights. No part of this work may
be reproduced-including by photocopy, microfilm or any other means- processed, stored electronically, copied or dis-
tributed in any form whatsoever without the written permission of the publisher.
©2013 by Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd.
Aachen, Auckland, Beirut, Budapest, Cairo, Cape Town, Dubai, Hägendorf,
Indianapolis, Maidenhead, Singapore, Sydney, Tehran, Wien
Member of the World Sport Publishers' Association (WSPA)
www.w-s-p-a.org
Printed by: B.O.S.S Druck und Medien GmbH, Germany
ISBN: 978-1-78255-001-3
E-Mail: info@m-m-sports.com
www.m-m-sports.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
1. How to use this book
Thinkstock/iStockphoto
11
16
2. The quest for better swimming.
20
3. What's in a drill?
28
4. 100 drills.
34
Drills for freestyle
34
Body position drills.
34
1. Tip forward..
35
2. Lateral balance.
38
5

100 more swimming drills
6
3. Streamline
4. Power zone
40
42
Kick drills
44
5. Fish don't have knees.
45
6. Kick the ball
47
7. Invisible kickboard.
49
Arm stroke drills
51
8. Over the barrel...
52
9. Elbow extension
54
10. 3D freestyle
56
11. Accelerate the arm stroke.
58
Recovery drills...
60
12. Trailing hand
.61
13. Loose hand swing.
63
14. Pocket
65
Breathing drills
67
15. Reach to inhale
68
16. Breathe from the hips.
70
17. Constant breathing.
72
Leverage drills
75
18. Lean in, lean out.
76
19. No flat freestyle!.
78
20. Maintain the centerline..
80
21. The kick lever.
83
Coordination drills.
85
22. United strokes
86
23. Reach and recover.
89
24. Catch and push.
91

Table of Contents
25. Swimming tall.
93
Drills for backstroke
95
Body position drills.
.95
26. Spine line...
96
27. Head on a pillow.
98
28. Banana
100
Kick drills
102
29. Kick up!.
103
30. No knees/no toes
105
31. Streamline back kick.
108
32. The ankle drill
110
33. Good knee, bad knee
112
Arm stroke drills
115
34. Z Pull
116
35. Descend to catch..
118
36. Short pull, long push.
120
37. Throw it!
122
Recovery drills
124
38. Release to recover.
125
39. Non-Stop recovery
128
40. Eleven o'clock and one o'clock..
130
41. Firm elbow, loose wrist
132
Breathing drills
134
42. Nose breathing/mouth breathing.
135
43. Fuel your stroke
138
Leverage drills
140
44. Hip to hip.
141
45. The independent head.
143
7

100 more swimming drills
8
46. The perfect angle..
145
Coordination drills...
147
47. Home base checkpoint.
148
48. Find your X.
150
49. Backstroke silhouette
152
50. Core stability/core power.
154
Drills for breaststroke
156
Body position drills....
156
51. Two balance points.
157
52. Long float.
159
53. Short float
161
Kick drills
163
54. Foot awareness
164
55. Around the knees
167
56. Recover first.
170
57. Straight hip line
173
58. Feet outside knees.
176
Arm stroke drills
178
59. Sweep out, sweep in
179
60. Hairpin
181
61. Accelerate and abbreviate.
183
62. Elbow grease
185
Recovery drills
187
63. Speed recovery...
188
64. Get back to streamline
190
Breathing drills
192
65. Inhale with the insweep.
193
66. Exhale with the kick.
195

Table of Contents
67. No nodding!
Leverage drills
197
199
68. Exaggerated breaststroke.
200
69. Teeter-Totter.
202
70. Breastroke Wave.
204
71. Ride the glide.
.207
Coordination drills..
209
72. 3-phase breaststroke..
210
73. Arms then legs.
213
74. Counting breaststroke.
.216
75. Breaststroke silhouette.
218
Drills for butterfly
221
Body position drills.
221
76. Active floating
222
77. Hang from your hips
224
78. Short and long balance..
226
Kick drills
228
79. Head to toe dolphin
.229
80. No bones
231
81. High / low.
233
82. Dolphin with fins.
.235
83. Spirals
.237
Arm stroke drills
239
84. Pull/push butterfly.
.240
85. Catch wide
.242
86. Lean in, lean out..
244
87. Deep and shallow.
246
88. Finish and release.
248
9

100 more swimming drills
10
Recovery Drills
250
89. One arch
251
90. Hands follow
.254
Breathing Drills.....
256
91. Low profile
.257
92. Turtle.
.259
93. Head then hands.
261
94. Breathing rhythms.
.264
Leverage drills
267
95. Pike
.268
96. The moth
.270
97. Kick and catch, kick and breathe.
.272
Coordination drills.
98. Grab and go!
99. Weightless fly.
100. Full body fly.
.274
.275
.277
.279
Conclusion
Credits.
281
.282

INTRODUCTION
Introduction
It was when I was about twelve, that I figured out swimming really agreed with me,
and for the next twelve years competitive swimming was a central part of my life.
My identity was to a large extent defined by swimming. My schedule revolved
around training and swim meets. My daily routine was to rise before dawn and ride
my bike, along with my sisters single file through the streets of Berkeley, California,
pedaling the slight but steady uphill grade to swim practice at the YMCA where in
that 20-yard basement pool we swam a two-hour workout before school, and
another one after school.
I worked hard at those practices, accomplishing lots of swimming and thereby
achieving a superior level of conditioning. I also developed very efficient strokes,
partially by necessity-to make it through those tough practices—but also because of
my coaches' focus on honing of the mechanics of swimming. In addition to the
countless 200s I would do on a daily basis, there were a variety of technique drills
that used to annoy me to no end. Thinking back, I can remember drills that applied
to body position, kick, arm stroke and recovery, breathing, leverage and coordina-
tion. But at the time, I had no patience for drills... probably because I didn't under-
stand them.
I was one of those “thinking swimmers” with the distinct need to understand the
purpose of each set we were assigned, as opposed to the kind of swimmer who
simply trusts that the coach knows best. “How exactly is this exercise going to make
me a better swimmer?" I recall asking my coach, to which he would simply reply,
"Ready, go!"
So I would push off and do the drill of the day, lap after lap, convinced I was wast-
ing precious practice time, but eventually realizing improvements to my stroke
11

100 more swimming drills
12
Author Blythe Lucero as a young swimmer focuses on
her race to come.
efficiency through all that repetition. I
often wonder what would have become
of my swimming if I had understood the
purpose of each drill before pushing off.
Now that I am coaching swimming, I
make a big deal of the mind/body con-
nection. I want each swimmer to under-
stand the goal of every drill before
doing it. I spend a lot of time defining
the purpose of each exercise, describing
the desired outcome so the athlete has
a clear mental picture before pushing
off the wall. I feel strongly that an ath-
lete whose mind is as involved in the act
of swimming as his or her body is, will
improve more steadily because he or she
is prepared to absorb the full benefit of
the drill, and is further prepared to put
into use the technique the drill brings
forward.
The goal of a drill is not to do it then
leave it behind, but to do it and then
incorporate it into one's swimming. To
best accomplish this, the swimmer has
to understand what he or she is trying
to achieve in the first place.
In this book the reader will find 100
swimming drills to understand and
practice.

Introduction
This book is a sequel to “The 100 Best Swimming Drills,” (Meyer & Meyer Sport,
2006), which has been used by swimmers around the world. This second drill book
follows the same format as the first and gives swimmers and coaches even more
variety of drills with which to use to improve swimming technique.
This volume contains drills for each of the competitive strokes, and for specific
aspects of each of these strokes. Accompanying each drill are diagrams and photos
to help the swimmer visualize what the goal of the particular drill is while doing it.
Drill feedback charts follow each drill to help work through rough spots.
As you work your way through the drills in this book, the key word is focus. It's all
about thinking and swimming. If you find yourself losing focus, take a break. Start
again later. If one drill doesn't seem to work for you, try it a few more times, but
don't get frustrated and stop completely, just move on to another drill. Maybe go
back to that one that you just can't get after you finish all the other drills. Every
drill does not make sense to every swimmer. That is why there are a hundred drills!
Above all, have fun becoming a better swimmer.
13

CHAPTER ONE

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

100 more swimming drills
16
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
START TO FINISH
This book is designed for a swimmer interested in improving his or her swimming
skills all around to start at the beginning and build the various elements of one
stroke, from float through coordinated action, and then move on to the next stroke,
again practicing and building each element one upon another. The reader can work
through the four competitive strokes, starting with freestyle, then proceed to back-
stroke, breaststroke, and finally the elusive butterfly!
The strokes are presented in this order because many concepts central to the drills
in the Freestyle section, including correct floatation, productive kicking and arm
stroke acceleration will be helpful in achieving skills in the other strokes. In addition,
although the muscle development that occurs through practicing each particular is
slightly unique, practicing all the strokes gives the swimmer the most well rounded
strength development that will be beneficial to swimming in general. Lastly, many
swimmers will discover that a stroke they have previously avoided because it felt
slow or awkward will become their new favorite stroke as they learn to perform it
with the correct technique and coordination.
FOCUS ON A SINGLE STROKE
Swimmers interested in only a particular stroke can start at that stroke section and
work their way through the drills pertaining to that stroke, from float to coordina-
tion, simple to complex. Swimmers who want to focus on improving one certain
aspect of a particular stroke, will be able to flip to that particular section and find
a variety of drills to work on a certain troublesome stroke element.

How to use this book
Swimmers using this book in this last way will find it helpful to follow up drill prac-
tice for a particular element, such as arm stroke or kick, with the drills presented in
that stroke section for leverage and coordination. The reasoning behind this is that
once a swimmer improves one element of their stroke, the stroke fits together a bit
differently, either because of changes in the timing or momentum. Therefore it is to
the swimmer's advantage to practice putting all the stroke elements together again
to get the most out of their improved skill in the area of emphasis.
BRING THIS BOOK TO THE POOL
Whichever way you want to use this book, start by reading the drill(s) you are focus-
ing on thoroughly. Read them more than once. Look at the diagrams and photos so
you have a picture in your mind of what you are trying to do before you do it. Then
take the book with you to practice. Refer to it. Get it wet!
Practice a lot. Practice over several days and weeks. Most drills are awkward, even
uncomfortable at first. It is only through practice that they start to feel more natu-
ral. It is only when a drill starts feeling natural that it can start making sense and
help you make improvements to your swimming.
Between practice sessions, use the Drill Feedback Charts that follow each drill,
diagram and photo to work through stumbling blocks. The problems included in
these charts represent the most common trouble spots that can frustrate a swim-
mer's progress in achieving the full benefit of a particular drill. Accompanying each
common problem are modifications to help the swimmer stay on track. Remember
that making modifications is part of the learning process. Quality practice is key to
improving stroke technique. Strive to learn and practice each drill correctly for it to
have a positive impact on your stroke. Finally, the observations and feedback of a
trusted coach can be valuable in making the most out of every drill.
17

CHAPTER TWO

CHAPTER 1
HAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

100 more swimming drills
20
THE QUEST
FOR BETTER SWIMMING
Swimming is a sport for patient athletes. It takes time and focus to learn good
technique, and time and dedication to get strong enough to maintain good tech-
nique for any distance. Instant gratification is not often experienced in competitive
swimming. But, with patience, focus and dedication the rewards of better swimming
will come.
PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT?
Practice is a key element in improving swimming technique. And frequent practice
has been shown to increase the rate of improvement. Further, in swimming, where
forward motion is achieved through repetitive stroke actions, it is essential to use
correct technique while practicing the series of actions that make up the stroke. If
you practice poor stroke mechanics, you learn poor stroke mechanics. In swimming
like most things, it is quite difficult to un-learn bad habits. So, the saying “practice
makes perfect" is not exactly correct. What is more accurate is to say, "perfect prac-
tice makes perfect".
WHAT'S THE POINT?
When doing drill work to improve swimming, it is very important to understand the
point of each drill you are doing. Know what you are trying to achieve. Know what
the drill is supposed to emphasize. Know what improvements you are supposed to
feel through the drill. Focus on these things the entire time you are practicing.

The quest for better swimming
Doing drill work without this focus will not help you improve effectively because you
do not have a clear goal in mind. It is mindless swimming, and although sometimes
it's relaxing to be on auto-pilot when you swim, you must be alert and focused to
get good results from drill work.
WHAT TO FOCUS ON
Body Position
Body position is the foundation of good swimming. Time and effort devoted to
developing the best body position possible is well spent. An ideal float eliminates
a great deal of drag and positions the swimmer to get the most out of arm stroke
and kick, and to produce more leverage. Without a good float position a swimmer
will work harder for less return.
Kick
Being a strong kicker makes you a stronger swimmer. Good kickers depend on flex-
ibility and foot speed. Good kickers tend to have well developed endurance that can
give them an edge. The power added to the stroke by the lower limbs can make the
difference between winning a race or not. In addition the kick also adds balance to
the rest of the stroke, and provides an important rhythmic element.
21

100 more swimming drills
22
Arm Stroke
In every stroke except for breaststroke, the arm stroke provides most of the potential
power in swimming, making it a priority among all stroke elements to develop, refine
and perfect. For the purposes of this book, when the term arm stroke is used, it refers
to the propulsive part of the arm cycle, that is, the part where the arm is in the water.
Key points of the arm stroke include the catch, the path of the hand, elbow position
and acceleration from front to back. These are some of the primary elements of the arm
stroke that affect swimming efficiency and speed. As well as forward motion, the arm
stroke contributes to stroke alignment and balance to the rest of the swimming effort.
Recovery
The arm stroke recovery is an often-misunderstood element of the swimming stroke.
While the recovery is the most visible part of the arm stroke, as it happens out of
the water (except for breaststroke), its contribution to forward motion is minor.
Therefore spending a great deal of time and attention fashioning the look of this
part of the stroke is not a high priority. Instead, attention should be paid to the
balancing effect that the recovery has on the rest of the stroke. In addition, as the
name "recovery" implies, this is the time that the arms can rest, so developing a
relaxed recovery where rest can truly be achieved should be a main focus.
Breathing
Breathing in swimming, like any athletic effort is essential to keep the muscles
fueled. But more so than any other sport, breathing while swimming is limited by
the fact that the face is mostly in the water. Therefore breathing in swimming must
become an integral part of the stroke action, incorporated seamlessly into the line
of the stroke. Because poor breathing technique can halt forward motion by inter-
rupting the flow of the stroke, it should be a priority to develop good breathing
technique that works within the silhouette and rhythm of the stroke.

The quest for better swimming
Leverage
Unique to our sport is the way swimmers create forward motion from a floating
position, without the benefit of the ground used by land athletes to provide stability
and to create traction. Swimmers must create the leverage effect within their bodies
and learn to produce effective and ongoing leverage to realize the most efficient
forward motion while floating.
Coordination
The effectiveness of the many actions of swimming can either enhance each other
or fight each other. The best swimmers have discovered how to sequence and com-
bine these various actions so that each individual action works in a chain reaction
to enhance the way the body moves forward in the water.
23

24
100 more swimming drills
+

The quest for better swimming
IS YOUR TECHNIQUE “GOOD ENOUGH?"
I have frequently heard, “I just wanna swim!" as a coach. Some swimmers choose
to skip over drill work either due to time constraints, or because they think that
conditioning is a more important use of their time. Others view their swimming time
as a chance to relax. The problem is that due to the repetitive nature of swimming,
imperfect technique practiced again and again becomes habit, and can slow a swim-
mer's progress, and even keep the swimmer from reaching his or her potential.
In addition, stroke problems are a main cause of injury in swimmers. Even the most
developed swimmer has stroke flaws that, if repeated over and over, can cause
injury. For the same reason, it is very important that less experienced swimmers
learn correct technique and practice swimming correctly before they try to tackle big
workouts. Everyone can improve their swimming technique... and everyone should,
both to see their full potential, and, to avoid developing a technique-based injury
that can keep a swimmer out of the pool for months.
EXPERIENCE THE PROCESS
The process of improving your swimming requires patience. Improvements rarely
happen instantaneously. For those of us who are looking for instant gratification,
this may be a challenge. Often it takes several days or even weeks of repeating a
drill, or series of drills before you see and feel results. During those days or weeks
frequent practice is an important part of the learning process. Keep a clear picture
in your mind of what you are trying to achieve. Think about it while you are per-
forming the drills, and again afterwards.
All the time you devote to technique drills is cumulative. One day's work will build
a foundation for the next day's work. Be determined in your quest, and be sure to
celebrate every breakthrough!
25

CHAPTER THREE

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

100 more swimming drills
28
WHAT'S IN A DRILL?
Drill work involves performing a routine or exercise that emphasizes correct tech-
nique through repetition, exaggeration, contrast and/or example. Drills often
require the swimmer to perform only a part of a swimming stroke in order to focus
on a specific skill or movement.
Through practice, the drill becomes more natural for the swimmer to perform.
Only at that point, can the swimmer expect it to “rub off” on their regular swim-
ming stroke.
WORKING WITH DRILLS
You will see quantitative change and qualitative change when working with drills.
At first you may only be able to perform the drill for a few seconds.
Gradually, through practice you will find it possible to perform the same drill for
several minutes at a time. Or, at first you may not even get to the end of the pool
doing a drill for the first time, but over time you will be able to accomplish multiple
laps. Likewise, at first a drill will be so awkward that you just don't go anywhere. Yet
with patience and practice soon you will be performing the drill with ease.
Drills work over time through multiple stages of psychomotor learning. There is no
set time each stage will take. Every one is different. In order, the stages are:
Mechanics: The step-by-step movements which, like a new dance routine, are awk-
ward and slow at first, but through practice become more comfortable and fluid
to perform
Discovery: The instance when you actively begin to feel the point of the drill while
you are doing it

What's in a drill?
Understanding: The stage when you can perform the drill seamlessly with the goal
clearly in mind
Feel: The ability to change from drill to the regular swimming stroke and hold on to
the point of the drill.
Mastery: Swimming with improved understanding and feel, and more efficiency as
a result of drill practice
29

100 more swimming drills
30
USING SWIMMING DRILLS
In Warm Up
After loosening up the muscles with a few laps of relaxed, progressive swimming,
drills can be successfully merged into the warm up. Alternating 50s of drill and
swim works well. Using a series of related drills is also very beneficial to build
towards an efficient stroke. Using drills within a warm up sets the tone for a quality
practice session.
As a Recovery Set
After an intense set at practice, a few easy laps are in order. At that point, a less
intense recovery set should be done. This is the perfect time to fit drill work into the

What's in a drill?
workout. Not only will a drill set provide a needed break from swimming hard with-
out wasting precious time in the water, it will also give the swimmer the opportunity
to recapture his or her technique after the previous speed-centered set. Sometimes
technique can be sacrificed for speed, especially at the end of a set when the swim-
mer is getting tired. So, using a drill set after one of these hard sets is very
beneficial.
Within Sets
Sometimes it works to incorporate drills into a regular swim set. For instance,
instead of simply doing 5 x 100 freestyle, make the first lap a drill lap, but keep the
same interval as you would for all regular swim. Of course only certain drills would
be appropriate in this case. Some would just not work. Choose a drill that is
designed to do at near swim speed, so the set will be challenging, but doable. This
can be a fun and interesting way for swimmers to accomplish both conditioning
work and technique work at the same time.
Pre-Meet
Pre-meet swimming is an excellent time to bring in drills, both during taper, and
within the meet day warm up. Drills bring the mind into one's swimming, and focus
it on swimming right. Drills can be grounding if a swimmer gets nervous. Using a
long set of drill/swim laps that include many of the drills that have been especially
meaningful to swimmer is a good way to set a positive tone for the big swim.
Off Season
Off season swimming offers a low pressure atmosphere when many swimmers are
able to focus better on the technique of swimming, than during meet season. Off
season is when many swimmers and coaches choose to use drill work as a primary
element of their workouts.
31

CHAPTER FOUR

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2

CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

100 more swimming drills
34
100 DRILLS

DRILLS FOR FREESTYLE
BODY POSITION DRILLS
Good body position in freestyle makes everything else easier. Working on how to
float better in the water is not a waste of time at any level of the sport. A positive
body position decreases the amount of drag a swimmer produces, improves the
catch, and sets the swimmer up to get the most out of their stroke. Use the following
drills to improve your body position in freestyle.

100 drills
1. TIP FORWARD
The purpose of this drill
•
Achieving a downhill floating position
•
Understanding how to change your floating position
•
Avoiding drag
How to do this drill
Step 1: Take a big breath and float face down in the water, arms at your sides.
Step 2: Notice that your chest and upper body float higher, while your legs and the
lower body float lower. While this is the natural floating position for most people,
it is not advantageous for swimming. It is like swimming “uphill." From this uphill
position, your body bumps into a lot of water, creating drag.
Figure 1A: The natural floating position for most people
Figure 1B: Tip forward by pressing down with your chest for a
more advantageous floating position
Step 3: To change this
position into a more
advantageous floating
position, press down with
your chest and feel your
hips and legs rise. Practice
tipping forward until you
are able to achieve and
maintain a downhill float,
the positive body position
for freestyle.
35

100 more swimming drills
36

100 drills
Drill feedback chart
PROBLEM
When I press down with my
chest, my body bends in the
middle.
I run out of breath.
My legs still sink!
MODIFICATION
Hold your core firm while you press your ribs down
about two inches. Relax.
Simply stand up and start again. Do it as many times
as you need to until you are able to achieve a posi-
tive floating position by tipping your body forward.
Some people with low body fat or high muscle con-
tent will find it harder to float downhill. If you are
one of those people it is even more important for
you to learn to positively affect your floating posi-
tion. Practice more. You might also need to add a
gentle kick, but remember that the purpose of the
kick should not me to hold you up, but to move you
forward, so work hard to perfect a positive float by
pressing your chest downward.
37

100 more swimming drills
38
2. LATERAL BALANCE
The purpose of this drill
•
Getting away from flat
swimming
•
Learning to float well while
rolling
•
Feeling unified power from the
hips and shoulders
How to do this drill
Step 1: Take a big breath and float
face down in the water, arms at your
sides. Achieve a downhill floating
position.
Figure 2: Achieve lateral balance
Step 2: Holding your positive floating position, roll your body, but not your head
to your right about 45 degrees. Your left shoulder and hip should be out of the
water. Hold for the count of three.
Step 3: Roll your body back to your starting position, maintaining your effective,
downhill position. Hold for the count of three, then roll your body, but not your head
to your left about 45 degrees. Your right shoulder and hip should be out of the
water. Hold for the count of three.
Step 4: Roll back to your starting position. Stand and get another big breath then
repeat.
Step 5: Repeat Steps 1 - 4, adding a gentle flutter kick.

100 drills
Drill feedback chart
PROBLEM
MODIFICATION
I can't seem to control my Use your hips and shoulders to start and stop your
roll to 45 degrees... I just
roll.
keep going.
I loose my downhill float
very quickly when I roll.
Make sure you are looking down towards the bottom
of the pool and not forward.
When I add the kick, I The kick should be a very gentle, quiet kick and very
can't roll as well.
narrow. Make sure your hip action is connected to
your roll primarily rather than to your kick.
39

100 more swimming drills
40
3. STREAMLINE
The purpose of this drill
•
Learning to float tall
•
Eliminating drag
•
Creating a narrow silhouette
Figure 3: Streamline position
How to do this drill
Step 1: Standing with your back against a wall, extend
your arms above your head. Clasp one hand over the
other, so they make a point.
Step 2: Squeezing your ears with your arms, reach
higher with your hands. Press your hands, head, neck,
shoulders, spine and legs into the wall.
Step 3: Holding your position against the wall, stretch
your whole body upwards. Lift your ribs. Stand on your
tiptoes.
Step 4: Get in the water and push off the wall completely underwater, immediately
assuming the same position as you practiced against the wall. Be tall. Be narrow.
Feel yourself cut through the water without resistance.

100 drills
Drill feedback chart
PROBLEM
I can't see where
I am going!
MODIFICATION
This actually means your head is positioned correctly. You should
be facing the bottom of the pool, not looking forward. Yes, this
makes it difficult to see where you are going. You can look for-
ward with your eyes, put do not lift your chin. But it is best to
practice this drill in un-crowded pool conditions. Also use the
line on the bottom of the pool to avoid going off course.
I am not staying
Push off a bit deeper and with much more force. The more
underwater well.
forward motion you create, the better you will stay submerged.
I float to the sur-Also, be sure you are looking down at the bottom of the pool
face quickly.
and not forward.
When I push off
the wall, I end
up very deep.
Modification: It takes practice to know your depth. Make sure
your arms are correctly aligned with the rest of your body, aim-
ing straight ahead and not downward. Your body will follow
your arms, so they need to be positioned correctly as they were
on the wall.
41

100 more swimming drills
42
4. POWER ZONE
The purpose of this drill
•
Feeling core stabilization
•
Unifying the movement of the hips and shoulders
•
Swimming from the core
How to do this drill
Step 1: Stand in front of a full-length mirror. Allow your
arms to hang relaxed at your sides. Draw an imaginary
line connecting your left and right shoulders to your
left and right hips. Within this line is your Power Zone.
Figure 4: The Power Zone
Step 2: Without moving your head or feet, snap your
left shoulder and hip forward about 45 degrees. Feel
your right shoulder and hip snap back and equal
amount as a consequence. Snap your right shoulder
and hip forward and feel your left shoulder and hip
snap the opposite way. Practice controlling the move-
ment from your Power Zone.
Step 3: Begin to snap your same side shoulder and hip
forward in an alternating fashion, about once per sec-
ond rhythmically. Still keeping your head and feet still,
feel your arms start to swing as a result of the move-
ments of your Power Zone.
Step 4: In the pool, try swimming freestyle using your Power Zone to initiate the
arm stroke. Snap your right shoulder and hip forward as your right arm enters the

100 drills
water, and your left shoulder and hip as you left arm enters the water. Establish a
rhythm and try to feel that your arm stroke initiates from the movement of your
Power Zone.

100 drills
Drill feedback chart
PROBLEM
MODIFICATION
I feel my shoulders
doing the snap, but not
my hips.
By incorporating the hips into the snap too you will be
using your whole Power Zone and it will be an even
stronger and more stable action. Initiate the snap from
your hips, and let your shoulders follow, then your arms.
Practice this in front of the mirror first, so you can get
immediate feedback, then go back to the water.
I feel my arm stroke Because your core (Power