ADAPTED
AQUATICS
PROGRAMMING
SECOND
EDITION
A Professional Guide
Monica Lepore, EdD
West Chester University of Pennsylvania
G. William Gayle, PhD
Wright State University
Shawn Stevens, EdD
Edgemoor Community Center
Note: This e-book reproduces the text of the printed book,
but it may not include images, tables, or figures that
have restrictions on electronic distribution.
HUMAN KINETICS
Lepore, Monica, 1956-
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Adapted aquatics programming: a professional guide / Monica Lepore, G. William Gayle,
Shawn Stevens. -- 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-5730-1 (hard cover)
ISBN-10: 0-7360-5730-7 (hard cover)
1. Swimming for people with disabilities. 2. Aquatic exercises--Therapeutic use. 3. People with disabilities--Rehabilitation.
I. Gayle, G. William. II. Stevens, Shawn F., 1956- III. Title.
GV837.4.L47 2007
797.2'1087--dc22
2006101439
ISBN-10: 0-7360-5730-7 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-5730-1 (print)
ISBN-10: 0-7360-8586-6 (Adobe PDF)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8586-1 (Adobe PDF)
Copyright © 2007, 1998 by Monica Lepore, G. William Gayle, and Shawn Stevens
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or by any electronic, mechani-
cal, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography, photocopying, and recording, and in any information
storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.
The Web addresses cited in this text were current as of February 19, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
Acquisitions Editor: Jill E. White
Developmental Editor: Melissa Feld
Assistant Editor: Martha Gullo
Copyeditor: Jocelyn Engman
Proofreader: Anne Rogers
Indexer: Cynthia Swanson
Permission Manager: Carly Breeding
Graphic Designer: Bob Reuther
Graphic Artist: Tara Welsch
Photo Office Assistant: Jason Allen
Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg
Photographer (cover): Mark Anderman/The Wild Studio
Photographer (interior): Mark Anderman/The Wild Studio, except where otherwise noted. Photos on pages 135-137, 139, and
143-147 courtesy of G. William Gayle.
Art Manager: Kelly Hendren
Associate Art Manager: Al Wilborn
Illustrator: Al Wilborn
Printer: McNaughton & Gunn
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.Human Kinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia: Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
North Shore City
Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
PooyaKetab Channel, the source of English eBooks in
Physical Education & Sports Science.
https://telegram.me/LibExPh
This book is dedicated to our families and to the thousands of individuals with disabilities
from whom we learned the skills included in this book.
PooyaKetab Channel, the source of English
eBooks in Physical Education & Sports
Science.
https://telegram.me/LibExPh
This page intentionally left blank.
PooyaKetab Channel, the
source of English eBooks in
Physical Education & Sports
Science.
https://telegram.me/LibExPh
CONTENTS
Preface
ix
Acknowledgments.
xi
PART I
Foundations of Adapted Aquatics
1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to Adapted Aquatics
3
Evolution of Adapted Aquatics.
4
Legislation for Individuals With Disabilities.
10
Benefits of Aquatics Participation.
15
Applications of Aquatics Participation.
17
Summary
19
Chapter 1 Review.
20
CHAPTER 2
Models of Collaboration in Adapted Aquatics
21
Models for Adapted Aquatics.
22
Medical-Therapeutic Model
22
Educational Model.
25
Recreation Model.
29
Transdisciplinary Model.
32
Summary
37
Chapter 2 Review
37
CHAPTER 3
Inclusion and the Least-Restrictive Environment.
39
Placement, Inclusion, and the LRE
41
Continuum of Placements.
43
Prerequisites to Successful Inclusion
47
Developing and Maintaining Successful Inclusion Groups.
52
Using Activities to Facilitate Inclusion
61
Summary
66
Chapter 3 Review.
66
CHAPTER 4
Individualized Instructional Planning.
67
Planning for Assessment
68
Developing the IEP or IAPP.
77
Implementing the IEP or IAPP.
81
Summary
83
Chapter 4 Review
83
CHAPTER 5
Program and Organization Development
85
Organizational Foundations.
86
Communications and Promotion
91
Financial Development
92
Facilities Acquisition
94
Risk Management.
94
Program Development and Evaluation
96
Human Resource Management
99
Summary
106
Chapter 5 Review
106
CHAPTER 6
Facilities, Equipment, and Supplies
107
Facilities
109
Equipment and Supplies.
117
Summary
124
Chapter 6 Review
125
PART II
Facilitating Instruction
127
CHAPTER 7
Prerequisites to Safe, Successful,
and Rewarding Programs
129
Essential Communication Skills.
130
Transferring Techniques
133
Participant Care and Safety
147
Hydrodynamics
155
Positioning and Supporting Participants.
157
Summary
160
Chapter 7 Review.
161
CHAPTER 8
Instructional Strategies.
163
The Learning Process
164
Teaching, Facilitating, and Guiding Participants.
168
Addressing Problem Behaviors.
182
Summary
186
Chapter 8 Review.
187
CHAPTER 9
Specific Needs of Adapted Aquatics Participants.
189
Definitions of Common Disabilities in Adapted Aquatics.
190
Commonly Seen Attributes of Learners in Adapted Aquatics
193
Atlantoaxial Instability.
194
Attention Deficit
195
Auditory Perception Disorder.
195
Autonomic Dysreflexia or Hyperreflexia
196
Brittle Bones.
197
Cardiovascular Disorder
198
Circulatory Disorder
199
Contractures and Limitations to Range of Motion
200
Hearing Loss: Deafness and Hard of Hearing.
202
Hearing Loss: Deafblindness.
203
Head Control Difficulty
204
High Muscle Tone
206
Hyperactivity.
207
Interaction Difficulty
208
Joint Dysfunction.
209
Kinesthetic System Disorder
210
Memory and Understanding Difficulty
211
Multisensory Loss
213
Oral Motor Dysfunction.
213
Paralysis, Paresis, and Atrophy.
214
Posture Disorder.
216
Primitive Reflex Retention.
217
Proprioceptive Disorder
218
Range of Motion Dysfunction
218
Receptive or Expressive Language Disorder
218
Respiratory Disorder
219
Seizure Disorders
220
Tactile System Disorder
221
Temperature Regulation Disorder
222
Vestibular System Disorder
222
Visual Impairment.
223
Visual Perception Disorder.
225
Summary
226
Chapter 9 Review.
227
CHAPTER 10
Aquatic Fitness and Rehabilitation.
229
Health-Related Physical Fitness and Aquatic Exercise
231
Physical Conditions and Tips for Aquatic Rehabilitation
240
Summary
243
Chapter 10 Review.
244
PART III
Program Enhancement
245
CHAPTER 11
Adapted Aquatics Program Selection.
247
Program Environments
249
Program Purpose.
254
Types of Participation
255
Nationally Sponsored Adapted Aquatics Programs
255
Summary
259
Chapter 11 Review
260
CHAPTER 12
Competitive and Recreational Activities.
261
Effect of Legislation on Aquatics Participation
262
Competitive Swimming for Individuals With Disabilities.
263
Equitable Competition and Classification
269
Coaching Swimmers With Disabilities
272
Recreational Aquatic Activities.
276
Summary
279
Chapter 12 Review.
280
Appendix A Adapted Aquatics Position Paper of the Aquatic Council:
AAALF and AAHPERD
281
Appendix B Assessment Forms.
285
Appendix C Games and Activities for Various Age Groups.
305
Appendix D Information-Gathering Forms.
313
Appendix E Adapted Aquatics Program Resources.
319
Appendix F AAPAR Levels of Adapted Aquatics Credentials.
325
Glossary.
329
References
335
Index
345
About the Authors
353
Welcome to the second edition of Adapted Aquatics
Programming: A Professional Guide. This text is designed
for people seeking information on the empowerment
and self-actualization of individuals with disabilities
through swimming and related aquatic activities. It is
intended for university students studying recreation,
general or adapted physical education, special edu-
cation, therapeutic recreation, or related allied health
fields. This book supplies aquatics professionals the
necessary information for providing safe, effective,
and successful aquatics participation to individuals
requiring adaptations to environment, equipment,
instructional strategies, skill techniques, and teaching
methods. These adaptations may be necessary due to
variations in emotional, cognitive, or physical abili-
ties. This book does not substitute for basic aquatics
instructor credentials, nor does it replace instructor
credentials in adapted aquatics. At the time of pub-
lishing, it is the required text for the two adapted
aquatics instructor credentials in the United States: the
AAHPERD/AAPAR Adapted Aquatics Instructor and
the YMCA Swim Lesson Instructor-Individuals with
Disabilities. It is also a reference for all pool operators
concerned with best practices for adapted aquatics,
and it complements the DVD Introduction to Adapted
Aquatics by Sprint Aquatics.
This book was conceptualized in the late 1990s in
response to the American Red Cross disbanding its
national Adapted Aquatics Instructor program, thus
eliminating future editions of its 1977 textbook. In
addition, following the 1989 Canadian Red Cross
publication Adapted Aquatics: Promoting Aquatic
Opportunities for All and the 1994 AAHPERD pub-
lication by Carter, Dolan, and LeConey entitled
Designing Instructional Swim Programs for Individuals
with Disabilities, further editions did not develop. This
created a void in professional literature regarding best
practices in adapted aquatics and led to the 1998 first
edition of Adapted Aquatics Programming: A Profes-
sional Guide. Following 5 successful years with the
book, we and Human Kinetics reconceptualized the
textbook, adding information containing legislation,
instructional strategies, equipment, photographs,
and competitive and recreational aquatics activities.
Publication of this updated text will fill the market
void for a source of current best practices in adapted
aquatics programming. We hope you find this second
edition to be a valuable resource.
This edition of Adapted Aquatics Programming is
a significant addition to the aquatics literature. It is a
comprehensive resource and learning tool for the field
of aquatics. Approximately 50% rewritten from the first
edition, it includes a plethora of references, practical
pointers, background and history facts, teaching tips,
safety precautions, and administrative information.
Updates include relevant legislation, architectural
accessibility guidelines, competition information,
instructional strategies, and safety management. This
edition contains administrative best practices promot-
ing current thinking on inclusion in physical activ-
ity. It also includes basic skills for adapted aquatics
instructors and instructional strategies, methods, and
adaptations. Administration, risk management, and
human resource materials are studied, as are adapted
aquatics programs. Competitive, recreational, fitness,
and other enrichment uses of aquatics are illustrated
for individuals with disabilities.
This book is based on practical, action-based
research and on current thinking, laws, and practices.
As such, it is a practical approach to adapted aquat-
ics information. In addition to the chapter-opening
scenarios, each section provides specific techniques
as well as rationales for adapted aquatics program-
ming. Practical information is infused throughout
each chapter. We have based the information in this
book on applied successful techniques accumulated
over decades of experience in aquatics pedagogy.
Organization
Adapted Aquatics Programming begins with a brief
history of adapted aquatics, tracing its development
from its roots with therapeutic modalities and the
IX
allied health and exercise sciences through its matu-
ration toward an instructional and recreational view-
point. The book then examines legislation affecting
participation in aquatics education and aquatics rec-
reation for individuals with disabilities. The chapters
that follow introduce you to today's field of adapted
aquatics and then describe tools needed to provide
quality instruction. Final chapters supply enrichment
information to help you improve programs and refer
swimmers to opportunities beyond the instructional
realm.
This book is divided into 12 chapters organized
into three parts. Part I, Foundations of Adapted Aquat-
ics, covers the basics of adapted aquatics. Chapter
1 looks at the history of various health and exercise
organizations and their roles in the development of
what we now know as adapted aquatics. Terms and
phrases related to adapted aquatics are defined and
the various disciplines using adapted aquatics are
described. Chapter 2 examines models of service,
highlighting the medical-therapeutic, education,
recreation, and transdisciplinary models. Chapter 3
explores inclusion and the least-restrictive environ-
ment as educational concepts that can relate to life-
span programming. Chapter 4 delves into the how-tos
of individualized instructional planning for adapted
aquatics. Chapter 5 reveals the importance of program
and organizational development for the adapted
aquatics administrator, discussing risk management,
strategic planning, financial development, and human
resources. Chapter 6 finishes part I with a practical
look at facilities, equipment, and supplies—essential
components of an adapted aquatics program.
Part II of this text, Facilitating Instruction, builds
on the basic knowledge of part I and focuses on the
teaching of adapted aquatics. Chapter 7 introduces
prerequisite skills that adapted aquatics instructors
must possess, including communication, physical
assistance, transferring techniques, and participant
care and safety. Chapter 8 discusses the learning pro-
cess, the selection of appropriate instructional strate-
gies, teaching cues, and adapted stroke techniques,
as well as strategies to address behavior problems of
some individuals with disabilities. Chapter 9 concen-
trates on the unique attributes that swimmers with dis-
abilities are most likely to possess that need attention
from an adapted aquatics instructor. Lastly, chapter
10 addresses fitness aspects of adapted aquatics pro-
grams from a health-related fitness approach.
Part III, Program Enhancement, rounds out the
book by discussing adapted aquatics program selec-
tion and adapted aquatics opportunities beyond the
pool. Chapter 11 focuses on real-life adapted aquat-
ics settings, exploring community-based, residential,
hospital-based or therapeutic, and school-based
programs. Chapter 12 introduces competitive swim-
ming for individuals with disabilities and describes
the national and international sport organizations
sponsoring the competitions. This final chapter ends
with a discussion on recreational aquatic activities,
including waterskiing, scuba diving, and boating,
addressing both equipment and performance tech-
niques.
As you read the text, you will discover that it
approaches adapted aquatics from a noncategorical
viewpoint. In other words, it is not organized in such a
way that you can use it to look up a disability category
and find magical, all-inclusive solutions for working
with a particular disability. Rather, chapters 8 and 9
describe the typical attributes making each disability
unique. You may then draw upon that knowledge to
review issues that a swimmer with specific charac-
teristics may face in the aquatic setting.
Features
This second edition of Adapted Aquatics Program-
ming provides new features, including scenarios that
introduce each chapter, chapter objectives, up-to-
date photos and diagrams, updated references and
resources, additional stroke adaptations, inclusionary
principles, and current information on accessibility of
pools and spas. None of these features was available
in the previous edition.
Preservice preprofessionals will find the life-
experience scenarios a great way to begin each
chapter. These practical examples will help them
engage with the material by providing a reference
point for the text ahead. The chapter objectives list
major tenets and provide an overview of what is to
be learned from the chapter. Preprofessionals and
professionals in allied fields (occupational or physical
therapy, kinesiotherapy, aquatics instruction, man-
agement, or coaching) will find materials in this text
to supplement existing academic and experiential
aquatics backgrounds.
Another unique feature of this book is its more
than 100 photos, diagrams, and drawings that bring
its words to life. The photos demonstrate the points
made in the text and pull the reader into the written
word, illustrating concepts in a manner that words
alone cannot.
Finally, the appendixes at the end of this book
support the materials in the chapters in a practical
manner. Forms, games, and lists of resources provide
direct links between the materials in the chapters and
the transition to the day-to-day working of adapted
aquatics programs.
X
Thank you to Melissa Feld, Martha Gullo, and Amy
Tocco at Human Kinetics.
Thank you to Christine Stopka for her informative
and thorough review of this book, and to all of our
anonymous reviewers for their recommendations.
Thank you to the AAHPERD/AAPAR Master Teach-
ers of Adapted Aquatics for their suggestions to the
second edition.
Thank you to Marsha K. Mazz, senior accessibil-
ity specialist, technical assistance coordinator, U.S.
Access Board, for information related to ADA swim-
ming pool accessibility guidelines.
Thank you to Dave Lenox, Ryan Murphy, and Doug
McAllister for contributing to the Special Olympics
sections of this text.
Thank you to Deborah Hertz of the NMSS and Kate
Cowperthwait, president of the Delaware chapter of
the NMSS, for input into the sections on multiple
sclerosis and aquatics.
Thank you to Ellen Caruso for information on the
Aquatic Physical Therapy Section of the American
Physical Therapy Association.
Thank you to Mary Essert, Grace Reynolds, Jerald
Jordan, J. Gunderson, Jerry McCole, Pam Danberg,
Mark Lucas, Dennis Runyan, Reed Gershwind, and
Bobbie Beth Scoggins, EdD, president of the USADSF,
for their help with the history of adapted aquatics and
competitive aquatics for people with disabilities.
Thank you to the staff at the following organiza-
tions for their assistance with the photo shoot: Rocky
Run YMCA, Media, Pennsylvania; the Jewish Commu-
nity Center of Wilmington, Delaware; and the Mary
Campbell Center, Wilmington, Delaware.
Thank you to Gail Dummer of Michigan State
University for her contributions to competitive and
recreational swimming information.
Thank you to Andrew Alderfer; Tim and Colleen
Hoge; Josh Lorello; Elizabeth Nolan; Olivia and lan
Riehl; Michael, Maggie, Danny, and Bridgett Malloy;
Lily and Nate Seagraves; Jack VanWinkle; Cici and
Jared Cosier; and all the families in the West Chester
University Adapted Physical Activities Program for
participating in the photo shoot.
Thank you to Sharna Shuford, Justin Westmorland,
Michelle Hands, and Paul Dietrich for their assistance
with photographs.
Thank you to Mark and Doris Anderman of The
Wild Studio photographers.
Thank you to Maria Lepore-Stevens for her support
and creativity during the writing of this book and as
a helper at the various photo shoots.
Thank you to the DeBenny family for the use of
their pool and their support for the photos in this
book.
Thank you to the duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, Delaware, for their assessment and
referral forms.
Thank you to the athletes, staff, and volunteers at
all the Camp Abilities Sports Camps in Alaska, Ari-
zona, New York, Pennsylvania, and Puerto Rico for
the creative ideas they have shared and the photos
they provided.
Thank you to Lauren Lieberman, Katrina Arndt,
Paxton Copp, Amanda Tepfer, Megan O'Connoll,
Jeanine Fittapaldi-Wert, Alisa Carrozza, Leah
Posocco, Beth Foster, Kat Ellis, Gina Pucci, Dani
Laroux, Gwen Schnabel, Heidi Rollheiser, Ibra Cor-
daro, and Margarita Fernandez for their support in
sharing sports camp materials and life lessons.
Thank you to Pat, Frank, Anne, Donna, and DJ for
their support during this book process.
XI
PooyaKetab Channel, the source of English
eBooks in Physical Education & Sports Science.
https://telegram.me/LibExPh
This page intentionally left blank.
PART I
Foundations
of Adapted
Aquatics
This page intentionally left blank.
Introduction to
Adapted Aquatics
1
Megan is a 10-year-old girl who requires maximum physical assistance to
participate in her land-based physical education class. Because of her
lack of ability and voluntary movement on land, Megan's caregivers believe that
Megan needs other forms of activity in order to achieve the benefits of physical
fitness. They have asked the school district for a physical education assessment
to determine if Megan is making progress in her land-based physical education
class. Her caregivers have noticed that Megan exhibits the most independence
when placed in a flotation device in her community pool. Therefore, they have
asked that the assessment include a swimming component.
During the land portion of the physical education assessment, Megan was
unable to participate in physical activities without adult intervention. She was
not able to consistently perform voluntary movements against gravity or raise
her heart rate unless physically assisted. In contrast, during the pool assessment,
by using a head/neck flotation device Megan was able to raise her heart rate
by 40 beats per minute without teacher intervention. In addition, she continually
moved her arms and legs for 9 minutes without prompting.
Because of Megan's performance during the aquatics assessment, Megan's
individualized education planning committee decided that in addition to physi-
cal education instruction, Megan should receive adapted aquatics instruction
at the expense of the school district.
3
Adapted aquatics instruction is no longer the exclu-
sive business of camps, residential schools, and
after-school recreation programs. Adapted aquatics
instruction can complement a land-based physical
activity program as well as stand alone as a valuable
part of physical education for K through 12 students
or as a physical activity program for adults and senior
citizens. Because of the physical support that water
provides, many people whose disability impairs
mobility on land can function more independently
in an aquatic environment, without the assistance of
braces, crutches, walkers, or wheelchairs. Indeed,
water is a medium that physically frees individuals
with disabilities, allowing them to safely and suc-
cessfully participate in physical activity. You can help
these individuals discover this freedom. Specifically,
by continuing your professional development you
will better understand the benefits of aquatics for
individuals with disabilities, the related federal legis-
lation mandates, and the need for positive community
attitudes toward the inclusion of individuals with dis-
abilities in aquatics. In this chapter, you'll learn how
the field of adapted aquatics has evolved and about
the various U.S. agencies involved in aquatics pro-
grams for people with disabilities. In addition, you'll
learn about the disability rights legislation that has
affected the aquatics industry, the benefits of instruc-
tional aquatics programs, and the various applications
of aquatics for people with disabilities.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
From this chapter, you will learn the
following:
→Adapted aquatics has evolved from a
therapeutic modality to its current focus
on instruction, water safety, fitness, and
recreation.
→Several national organizations in the
United States provide aquatics programs
for people with disabilities.
→Federal legislation in the United States
has affected the availability of aquatics
programs for people with disabilities.
→Participation in aquatic activities ben-
efits persons with disabilities physically,
socially, and emotionally.
→There are similarities and differences
among programs of adapted aquatics,
adapted water exercise, therapeutic
water exercise, aquatic therapy, and
adapted swimming.
Evolution of Adapted Aquatics
Although aquatic participation for therapeutic pur-
poses has a long history, individuals with disabilities
have not always had full access to swimming and
water safety instruction for educational and leisure
purposes. Until recently, U.S. society and even pro-
fessionals working with individuals with disabilities
did not generally encourage such individuals to
participate in community aquatics due to numerous
barriers, including conflicting philosophies about
service delivery and professional responsibility. Water
provides a unique opportunity for developing physi-
cal and motor fitness, and aquatic opportunities have
expanded from passive, therapeutic programming
(see figure 1.1) to instructional swimming (see figure
1.2), recreational aquatics, and even international
competition.
Using water as a therapeutic tool predates all
other modalities of physical medicine, extending
back to ancient Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Indian,
and Chinese civilizations, who used the water for
soothing and healing purposes (De Vierville, 2004).
In later times, in Europe during the Middle Ages, large
healing pools and spas were built in such places as
Bath, England.
4
Figure 1.1 The medical-therapeutic model was a pre-
cursor to instructional adapted aquatics.
Photo courtesy of Roosevelt Warm Springs
Other European spas that focused on the healing
power of water were formed in the 19th century and
even today the science of aquatic therapy takes place
in spas such as Bad Ragaz in Switzerland. Many other
forms of treatment have come and gone, but the use
of water endures.
All over the world, people use swimming or
bathing in oceans, pools, lakes, rivers, and spas as
a means of relaxation, therapy, and learning. In the
United States, people with and without disabilities
flock to their local swim club for fun, exercise, and
social interaction.
The 21st century boasts approximately "360
million annual visits to recreational water venues"
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC],
2003, p. 513) in the United States, and aquatics stands
as the second most popular recreational activity in
the United States.
The history of therapeutic aquatic activities in the
United States predates the New World settlers, with
Native Americans using hot and cold bathing plunges
as part of spiritual and medical regimes. Many years
later, Thomas Jefferson had a spa built around the nat-
ural warm springs in West Virginia. These early U.S.
experiences in natural mineral springs led the way
for more curiosity about the healing power of water,
and in the late 1800s and the early 1900s the first
U.S. medical standards for warm water therapeutics
were published by Simon Baruch. Other leaders in
hydrotherapy who emerged in the early 20th century
were such medical personnel as John Kellogg and
Guy Hinsdale (De Vierville, 2004).
Also in the early 1900s,
before World War I, Charles
Lowman, known as the father
of water exercise for therapeu-
tic purposes, began his work
in California with patients
with cerebral palsy, paralysis,
and infectious diseases. In the
1930s he systematized hydro-
therapy, which he defined
as the treatment of disease,
disability, and ill health using
water as the therapeutic
medium. Several years later,
during the post-World War
II polio epidemic, physicians
realized the benefits of water
exercise for people with polio,
and this realization increased
the number and type of clien-
tele using water exercise for
rehabilitation. Unfortunately,
the public's fear of people with
polio using community swimming pools (and possibly
spreading the virus through pool water) restricted
their aquatic rehabilitation programs to hospitals and
spas. As participation in water rehabilitation grew,
researchers carefully studied several programs and
concluded that water exercise had many benefits for
overall rehabilitation (Bryant, 1951).
Figure 1.2 Instructional adapted aquatics often consists of a small group working
on skills such as breath control.
At the same time, rehabilitation of soldiers and
civilians who were wounded during World War II
increased awareness of and demand for all types
of therapy, creating greater need for therapeutic
aquatic activities. Instructors were needed to con-
duct these programs and so the U.S. Armed Forces
initiated training programs for instructors, while
the American Red Cross (ARC) developed its own
programs. The growth of the medical uses of water
(hydrology, hydrotherapy) in addition to recreational,
instructional, and fitness uses prompted the forma-
tion of various aquatics programs. By the 1960s, the
separation between using water as therapy and using
it for people with disabilities in instructional and
recreational settings had officially begun. The early
efforts of using water for therapy that were made
by medical personnel led to many efforts toward
meeting the needs of individuals with disabilities,
including instructional, recreational, and competitive
programs created by the ARC, Young Men's Christian
Association (YMCA), Special Olympics, National
Multiple Sclerosis Society (NMSS), Arthritis Foun-
dation, and American Alliance for Health, Physical
Education, Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD). The
therapy side of aquatics for people with disabilities
6
split into its use in physical and occupational therapy
and its use by allied health personnel credentialed
by nonmedical certifications such as the Interna-
tional Council for Aquatic Therapy and Rehabilita-
tion Industry Certification. In addition, the Aquatic
Therapy and Rehabilitation Institute became one of
the premier educational organizations for developing
aquatic therapy fitness professionals.
On the nontherapeutic side, in the 1970s the
efforts of the ARC, YMCA, and Special Olympics
turned aquatics for people with disabilities toward
instructional, recreational, and competitive uses.
The following sections provide a brief background
on U.S. organizations that in the second half of the
20th century (and in the early 21st century) affected
adapted aquatics. Some focused on instructional
adapted aquatics, some on water exercise, and some
on competitive opportunities.
Instructional and Recreational
Aquatics: American Red Cross
The ARC responded to World War II by developing its
Convalescent Swimming Program in the early 1940s.
This program offered swimming and water activities
that accommodated veterans with disabilities. In
1949, the ARC added a training course for instruc-
tors to ensure program quality (American Red Cross
[ARC], 1977). The program focused on adapting
swim strokes for persons with physical disabilities
such as amputations and paraplegia. The ARC revised
the program in 1955, renaming it Swimming for the
Handicapped.
In the 1970s, the ARC broadened the scope of
Swimming for the Handicapped and changed the
program content to include individuals with all
types of physical, mental, and emotional disabilities.
The expanded program was called Adapted Aquat-
ics. Louise Priest of the ARC national headquarters
developed the ARC Adapted Aquatics textbook in
1977, and through its local chapters, the ARC sup-
ported certifications for instructor trainers, instruc-
tors, and instructor aides. The ARC Adapted Aquatics
philosophy was couched in the idea that through
swimming and water safety instruction, individuals
with disabilities could experience the thrill of aquatic
activity while participating in programs available in
their communities.
The Adapted Aquatics programs and accompany-
ing instructor certification were widely taught until
the beginning of the 1990s, when the Red Cross
revamped its general Water Safety Instructor (WSI)
program to include information about individuals
with disabilities. Much of the WSI resource informa-
tion regarding adapted aquatics is contained in the
ARC text Swimming and Water Safety (2004a) and
in the Water Safety Instructor's Manual (2004b).
Ultimately, the ARC embraced the philosophy of
including individuals with disabilities in general
aquatics programs and eliminated its segregated
Adapted Aquatics programs and certifications on the
national level.
Instructional and Recreational
Aquatics: Young Men's Christian
Association
As Louise Priest pursued development of the ARC
Adapted Aquatics programs, Grace Demmery
Reynolds initiated similar efforts with the YMCA.
In 1960, the Longview, Washington, YMCA, now
the YMCA of Southwest Washington, published A
Swimming Program for the Handicapped. Written by
Reynolds and edited by Dallas and Esther Dedrick,
this manual was to become the framework for the
YMCA's national adapted aquatics program during
the 1970s. Dallas Dedrick presented this manual
at the Pacific Northwest Area Council of YMCAS,
of which he was president, at the 1960 meeting in
Spokane, Washington. In 1968 and 1969, Reynolds,
then director of recreation for the handicapped at
the Longview, Washington, YMCA, represented the
YMCA on the committee of the Council for National
Cooperation in Aquatics (CNCA) and the American
Alliance for Health, Physical Education, and Recre-
ation (AAHPER) in the development of A Practical
Guide for Teaching the Mentally Retarded to Swim
(1969). In April 1970, Reynolds led a YMCA study
on its swimming programs for special populations.
Following Reynolds' presentation of the results at
the 1970 YMCA National Aquatic Conference, the
national YMCA wrote proposals to develop training
materials, budgeting guidelines, safety standards,
personnel recruitment standards, record mainte-
nance guidelines, and skill progressions for aquatics
programs for persons with disabilities (Reynolds,
1973). In 1972, the YMCA introduced two levels
of certification. Aquatic Leader: Swimming for the
Handicapped was for assistant instructors, while
Instructor: Swimming for the Handicapped was for
people who planned and implemented adapted
aquatics programs. In later years these certifications
were called YMCA Aquatic Assistant and YMCA Spe-
cialist Instructor/Leader in Aquatics for Special Popu-
lations. Subsequently, the YMCA introduced a third
level of certification, Aquatic Director/Administrator
for Special Populations. In 1973, the national board
of YMCAs published a manual entitled A Swimming
Program for the Handicapped, which was edited by
Reynolds.
From 1973 to 1982, Grace Demmery Reynolds
directed three special projects for the Bureau of Edu-
cation for