BREAKTHROUGH
SWIMMING
Cecil M. Colwin
stroke mechanics • training methods • racing techniques
Breakthrough
Swimming
Cecil Colwin
Human Kinetics
Colwin, Cecil.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Breakthrough swimming / Cecil M. Colwin.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7360-3777-2
1. Swimming--History. I. Title.
GV836.4.C65 2002
797.2'1'09--dc21
ISBN-10: 0-7360-3777-2
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-3777-8
Copyright © 2002 by Cecil M. Colwin
2001039994
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography, photocopying, and recording, and
in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.
Portions of this work are based on the book Swimming Into the 21st Century (1992), authored by Cecil M. Colwin and
published by Human Kinetics.
Developmental Editor: Cynthia McEntire; Assistant Editor: Scott Hawkins; Copyeditor: John Wentworth; Proof-
reader: Erin Cler; Indexer: Margaret Colwin; Permission Manager: Toni Harte; Graphic Designer: Nancy Rasmus;
Graphic Artist: Francine Hamerski; Photo Manager: Clark Brooks; Cover Designer: Robert Reuther; Photographer
(cover): Darren England/ALLSPORT; Photographers (interior): See credit notices on page ix; Art Manager: Craig
Newsom; Line Drawings: Cecil M. Colwin; figure 6.1 by Robert B. Colwin; Mac Illustrations: Interactive
Composition Corporation; Printer: Versa Press
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts can also
be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.Human Kinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: orders@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia: Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: liaw@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
North Shore City
Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
To Margaret, my wife and best friend these many years
Contents
Acknowledgments
Credits
Introduction
Part I Development of Stroke Fundamentals
vii
ix
xi
Chapter 1 History of the Swimming Strokes
3
Chapter 2 Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques
33
Chapter 3 Strokes, Starts, and Turns
49
Part II Movement Through Water
Chapter 4
Understanding Hydrodynamics
75
Chapter 5 Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming
91
Chapter 6 Coaching the Feel of the Water
107
Part III Advances in Training
Chapter 7 Progression of Training Methods
123
Chapter 8 Principles of Modern Training
137
Chapter 9
Physiological Research and Applications
151
Chapter 10 Development of a Training Program
167
Part IV Past, Present, and Future of the Sport
Chapter 11 Evolution of Competitive Swimming
185
Chapter 12 Doping, Testing, and Modern Efforts to Gain an Edge
207
Chapter 13 Looking Back, Looking Ahead
217
Appendix
A 400-Year Bibliography of the Historical
Development of the Swimming Strokes
References
Index
About the Author
229
233
239
247
V
Acknowledgments
This book was made possible through the di-
rect and indirect help of a great number of
people. I wish to express my most sincere
thanks to all of them, although their number
precludes my naming more than a few.
Colleagues and Contributors
Edward Atraghji, formerly of the Canadian
Aeronautical Establishment, taught me about
flow visualization and provided helpful sug-
gestions on the treatment of the fluid dynamic
content of this text.
Dr. David Pyne, Physiologist, Australian In-
stitute of Sport, contributed chapter 9 on the
physiology of swimming training and shared
his unique experience in day-to-day practical
work with some of the world's greatest swim-
mers.
William "Buck" Dawson wrote on the his-
tory of American swimming in chapter 11.
Nort Thornton, head swimming coach of the
University of California at Berkeley, gave per-
mission to use material from his excellent ar-
ticle, “A Few Thoughts on Training," from the
ASCA magazine.
Thomas Kirk Cureton gave permission to
use materials from chapter 4 of How to Teach
Swimming and Diving (1934), published by As-
sociation Press, New York, and to use the chap-
ter footnotes as a framework in compiling my
chronological bibliography of the history of the
swimming strokes.
Resource Specialists
I am particularly grateful to those who guided
me to valuable sources of information that I
otherwise would have missed.
Liana Van der Bellen, chief of the Rare Books
Division, National Library of Canada, gave me
invaluable assistance in researching the works
of Thevenot (1620–1692) and Olaus Magnus
(1490–1557) and even placed before me origi-
nal books by the two, both in pristine condition.
Dave Kelly of the Library of Congress in
Washington, D.C. and Harry McKown, refer-
ence associate of the North Carolina Collection,
Wilson Library, the University of North Caro-
lina at Chapel Hill, went to great lengths to
provide references on the early development of
American swimming. I express my deepest
appreciation to both for their courtesy and
cooperation.
Sasha Orivi of the State Library of Victoria in
Melbourne conducted a search for, and pro-
vided the first detailed account of, the first
swimming race in Australia.
Mardyth Hewitt of the National Library of
Canada and Michelle Robichaud of the Library
of Parliament provided expertise in locating
William Byrd's diary.
Robert Schleihauf granted permission to pre-
pare and publish drawings adapted from illus-
trations in "Swimming Propulsion: A Hydro-
dynamic Analysis” (1977).
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York,
gave permission to use the extract from 1st
century Roman poet, Manilius, as contained in
Sport in Greece and Rome.
Dr. Kare I. Birkeland and Dr. Peter Hem-
mersbach, both of the Hormone Laboratory,
Aker Hospital, Oslo, Norway, and the publish-
ers of Sports Medicine, Adle International, gave
permission to use information from their ar-
ticle "The Future of Doping Control in Ath-
letes."
Dr. Brent Rushall gave permission to reprint
the list of positive drug tests by swimmer by
country as it appeared in Swimming's Hall of
Shame published by Sports Science Associates.
Karin Helmstaedt gave permission to re-
print from her coverage of the German drug
trials as reported in Swimnews, July 2000, and
also to Swimnews for permission to reprint this
article.
vii
Professor Steven Vogel gave permission to
reprint from his book Cat's Paws and Catapults.
John Leonard, executive director of the
American Swimming Coaches Association,
gave permission to adapt from his articles on
coaching certification and his report on the
FINA Conference on Doping Control, Hong
Kong, March 2000.
Betty Armbruster gave permission to reprint
from the work of her late father, David A.
Armbruster, Competitive Swimming and Diving
(1942), four sets of sequence drawings (namely
of the freestyle stroke, backstroke,breaststroke-
butterfly, and butterfly-breaststroke).
Dr. Phillip Whitten, editor in chief of Sports
Publications, Inc., gave permission to reprint
from "A Century of Change," an article written
by the author that originally appeared in Swim-
ming World, December 1999, as well as the
ranking lists of the top male and female swim-
mers of the 20th century.
N. J. Thierry, editor and publisher of
Swimnews magazine and secretary of the Inter-
national Swimming Statisticians' Association,
gave general permission to use extracts from
Swimnews and prepared the graphs of progres-
sion of long-course and short-course world
records on pages 195 and 196.
Fred Wilt, Olympic runner, Sullivan Award
winner, and acknowledged authority on track
training, kindly reviewed the information about
the influence of track training on swimming
and checked it for accuracy.
Gilmore Reproductions of 61 Queen Street,
Ottawa, provided photocopying services and
the use of advanced technologies in making
copies of text and artwork. Their help and
kindness in the preparation of three books over
the years have been invaluable.
viii
I am grateful to Colin Trewavas, Municipal
Research and Merseyside Records Office,
Liverpool, England, for his courtesy and kind-
ness in providing access to records and photo-
graphs of milestones in the history of
Liverpool's bath and washhouses, which were
among the first pools built in England.
Whatever else a book may be, it is ulti-
mately an offering to its potential readers, and
it must be presented to them in a form that is
accessible and attractive. A vast symbolic dis-
tance often separates the head of an author
from the eyes of a reader, and those who seek
to bridge that gulf, or at least to narrow it, bear
a weighty responsibility. It can only succeed
in the hands of men and women who revere
books and their making. Of these there are
greater and lesser, which is why an author
published under the imprimatur and imprint
of Human Kinetics must never forget his good
fortune. In this regard, I express my deep
appreciation to my publisher, Rainer Mar-
tens; acquisitions editor, Ted Miller; and de-
velopmental editor, Cynthia McEntire, whose
advice and expertise were invaluable. I also
appreciate very much the advice of art direc-
tor Craig Newsom and the expert efforts of
sales director Charles Walters and marketing
manager Kelley Halliburton. Thanks are ex-
tended to assistant editor Scott Hawkins who
ensured the book's smooth progress through
the final production stages.
Last, but by no means least, I owe a special
debt of gratitude to my wife, Margaret, for her
hard work and assistance in preparing the final
draft of this book. Her encouragement, wise
counsel, patience, and untiring efforts eased
the task.
ix
Credits
Photos
Photo of Janet Evans on page 3 Rob Tringali Jr./
SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Lenny Krayzelburg on page 33 Bongarts/
SportsChrome USA.
Photos
Figures
Photo of Krisztina Egerszegi on page 49 Bongarts/
SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Kristy Kowal on page 75 © Michael Zito/
SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Lenny Krayzelburg on page 91 Michael
Zito/SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Jenny Thompson on page 107 © Rob Tringali
Jr./SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Ashley Chandler on page 123 Rob Tringali
Jr./SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Yana Klochkova on page 137
Marco Chiesa.
Photo of Amy Van Dyken on page 151 © Rob Tringali
Jr./SportsChrome USA.
Photo on page 156 © Cecil Colwin.
Photo of Alexander Popov on page 167 Bongarts/
SportsChrome USA.
Photo of Mark Spitz on page 185 © Gjuljano
Bevilacqua/SportsChrome USA.
Photo on page 207 Tony Demin/International Stock.
Photo of Ian Thorpe on page 217 © Marco Chiesa.
Figures
Figure 9.1 Reprinted, by permission, from B.E. Counsil-
man and J.E. Counsilman, 1991, "The residual effects
of training" Journal of Swimming Research 7:5-12.
Figure 10.2 from "Constructing workouts with energy
system considerations" by E.W. Maglischo in American
Swimming Coaches Association World Clinic Yearbook
1985 (62) by T. Welsh (ed.), 1985, Fort Lauderdale, FL:
American Swimming Coaches Association. Reprinted
by permission of American Swimming Coaches Asso-
ciation and E.W. Maglischo.
Figure 10.3 Reprinted, by permission, from T.O. Bompa,
1985, Theory and methodology of training (Dubuque, IA:
Kendall/Hunt).
Figure 10.4 Reprinted, by permission, from T.O. Bompa,
1985, Theory and methodology of training (Dubuque, IA:
Kendall/Hunt).
Tables
Table 10.1 Reprinted, by permission, from J.E. Counsilman,
1975, "Нурохic and other methods of training evalu-
ated" Swimming Technique 12(1).
Table 10.2 Reprinted, by permission, from J.E. Counsilman,
1975, "Hypoxic and other methods of training evalu-
ated" Swimming Technique 12(1).
Table 10.3 Adapted, by permission, from T. Absaliamov,
1984, "Controlling the training of top level swimmers"
in How to develop Olympic level swimmers edited by J.L.
Cramer (Finland: International Sports Media) and
adapted, by permission, from D.B. Pyne and R.D.
Telford, 1988, "Classification of training sessions" Ex-
cel 5(2).
ix
Introduction
This book is about the evolution of competi-
tive swimming in all its major disciplines,
from its birth in early 19th-century England to
the present era.
Almost every era of competitive swimming
brought new ideas and breakthrough swim-
mers, who with scant regard for the record
books, reached undreamed of heights. But
never have there been such spectacular break-
throughs as those seen at the 2000 Sydney
Olympic Games and the 2001 World Champion-
ships in Fukuoka.
Breakthrough Swimming focusses on the meth-
ods and the innovative thinking behind the
success of these modern swimming giants who
have literally destroyed seemingly unassail-
able marks, and brought the sport to a new high
level of performance.
Portions of this book are based on my earlier
work, Swimming Into the 21st Century which
was published in 1992, after six years of prepa-
ration, but I could not have foreseen a need so
soon for an expanded and almost completely
re-written edition. The tumultuous events of
the last decade of the 20th century dictated
otherwise. Without doubt, no other period in
the history of swimming has presented greater
challenge or change.
The so-called velvet revolutions of the late
1980s that overturned Communism and even-
tually the Soviet Empire had an enormous im-
pact on every aspect of modern life, including
sport. The breakup of the Soviet Union saw
several new independent states join the ranks
of FINA (the international swimming federa-
tion), with a resultant increase in the number of
swimmers competing in major international
meets such as the Olympics and the World
Championships.
With the reunification of Germany on Octo-
ber 2, 1990, literally thousands of East German
sport administrators, coaches, and sport scien-
tists suddenly became unemployed. It is un-
known to what extent they became part of the
new Germany, although some of their coaches
found employment in other parts of the world.
What they contributed to swimming in other
countries is unknown, but at least one of their
number spent some time in China, conducting
clinics in that country. The appearance of
performance-enhancing drugs in Chinese
swimming seemed to have coincided with the
fall of the East German regime.
It is rare that one is given the chance to tackle
a job a second time, and this carefully researched
new edition is but a modest attempt to bring
past, present, and future into unison. However,
we should not view the evolution of competi-
tive swimming as a continuing linear process
because the pioneers of the sport proceeded
down many dead ends and also frequently
failed to develop potentially valuable ideas.
The gold was there but often thrown away to be
retrieved by others years later.
The process of change consisted of long peri-
ods of normal development in which there were
few deviations from the paradigms of existing
ideas. Then would follow a shorter period of
pronounced change, as rival ideas fought to
take the place of a dominant framework that
was beginning to decay through lack of progress.
The first part of the book introduces the
reader to the ingenuity of the great coach-
educators and how their restless inventiveness
and persistence gradually built the technical
foundations of a great sport. The evolution of
the swimming strokes is described and illus-
trated in detail, from the start of formal compe-
tition in the early 1830s through the advanced
techniques of today.
The 19th century saw experiments with dif-
ferent versions of the sidestroke, followed later
by the trudgen stroke. Then, as if to celebrate
the start of the 20th century, came an entirely
xi
new way of swimming, the surprisingly fast
crawl stroke. But it took most of the 20th cen-
tury for the crawl stroke to be improved and
refined until it became the beautiful, smooth-
flowing action exhibited by Pieter van den
Hoogenband, Ian Thorpe, Alexander Popoν,
and Susie O'Neill at the 2000 Sydney Olympic
Games, where they brought the understanding
of crawl-stroke swimming into a new millenium
and a new paradigm.
Over the years, during all the experiment-
ing with new stroke mechanics, the question
was often asked, “But what happens to the
water when a swimmer exerts effort against
it?" The answer is that we don't exactly know,
but it seems obvious that if swimming and
swimmers are to continue to improve we will
need to become far more adept at manipulat-
ing the reacting flow with ever increasing
efficiency. Then we ask other questions: How
much effort should a swimmer exert against
the water? Do we apply more effort than nec-
essary? Here again, we don't rightly know.
Suffice it to say that the text breaks new ground
in describing how by studying the flow reac-
tions created by the swimming stroke, certain
fluid dynamic principles can be used to un-
derstand, analyze, and improve stroke me-
chanics.
The discussion on the evolution of training
methods commences with the methods used
by the 19th-century pioneers then progresses
through the 20th century to the state-of-the-art
scientific training methods used by the world's
best swimmers in preparing for the 2000 Olym-
pic Games.
The doughty champions of Victorian En-
gland pursued training methods characterized
by ignorance and superstition. The old style
regimen of reducing a man to a living skeleton
by physicking, purgings, sweatings, and
bleedings, to build him up afresh was stupid as
well as cruel.
At the beginning of the 20th century, track
athletes were already experimenting with in-
terval training, but this form of training wasn't
adapted to competitive swimming until 50 years
later in the mid-1950s. Before this time, swim-
mers were too preoccupied with perfecting
techniques and had no idea of how much stress
xii
the human body could tolerate. The watch-
word was "train but do not strain!"
The chapters on training describe how, in the
1950s, Yale and U.S. Olympic coach Robert
Kiphuth introduced a method called wind-
sprints, which consisted of 50-meter sprints
interspersed with one-minute rest periods. Later
interval training methods used on the running
track were successfully adapted to swimming
by the Australians who combined them with
Kiphuth's earlier model. Not surprisingly, they
went on to win the majority of the swimming
medals in the 1956 Olympics. In the 1960s, Dr.
James Counsilman developed the first clear
outline of how different work-to-rest ratios
used in swimming training produced specific
physiological effects. As a direct result of his
emphasis on empirical research and useful ap-
plication, this era saw one of the greatest for-
ward surges in swimming history.
Included in the discussion on training meth-
ods is a brilliant contributing chapter by Dr.
David Pyne, physiologist to the Australian In-
stitute of Sport and to the successful Australian
National Swimming Team. Dr. Pyne covers the
physiology of modern swimming training and
the preparation of swimming teams for top-
flight international competition. In this state-
of-the-art presentation, Dr. Pyne presents in-
sightful views on future directions for the
successful application of scientific training.
The last part of this book traces the history of
competitive swimming, examines the current
problems facing the sport, and looks ahead to
future innovations. The colorful story of the
growth of organized competitive swimming is
covered in depth. This chapter spans the entire
panorama of competitive swimming, from its
start in 1837 as a professional sport to its reign
as an amateur sport for the next 100 years and
then its insidious return to professionalism in
the late 20th century. The text describes the
growth of international swimming and the birth
of FINA as the international governing body of
swimming, a development largely brought
about by prominent British officials who based
the FINA constitution on that of the Amateur
Swimming Association of Great Britain.
The development of the great Australian tra-
dition in swimming is covered in depth, begin-
xiii
ning with the construction of the first swim-
ming pool in the 1870s and continuing to the
reorganization of their national swimming pro-
gram in the late 20th century, which led to the
notable successes of Australian swimmers at
the Sydney Olympics. Following the Austra-
lians is an account of the outstanding record
and great contribution to world swimming by
the United States, the giant of world swimming
in terms of technical knowledge, coaching ex-
perience, excellence, and a long roster of bril-
liant Olympic champions that continued to in-
crease at the Sydney Olympics. The growth of
the national program concept and the sudden
and remarkable rise to supremacy by the Japa-
nese swimmers in the 1930s is also covered.
The chapter on the doping plague in swim-
ming discusses the so-called success of the
former state-sponsored East German program,
which was based on the illegal administration
of performance-enhancing drugs to athletes
under the charge of state officials, and the
subsequent trials of the officials involved. There
is also a detailed account of the current doping
problem in Chinese swimming, whose athletes
have tested positive far more frequently than
those of other countries. In the past 30 years, the
scourge of doping has gradually reached a
crisis point where the survival of competitive
swimming now lies in the balance. The most
astute minds of our sport, almost without ex-
ception, agree on this point.
The last 10 years have seen the abandonment
of the once holy grail of amateurism and the
growing influence of large corporate sponsors,
warmly welcomed by officialdom as partners
in the sport. The availability of prize money
and large endorsement fees tempt the use of
performance-enhancing drugs, a problem that
shows no sign of diminishing, despite attempts
to fight it.
With these changes has come a growing
disregard, in some quarters, for the integrity
of the sport and the educational values inher-
ent in hard work and honest effort, not to
mention the thrill and challenge of fair compe-
tition. As swimming moves into the new mil-
lennium, it is clear to keen observers that the
sport is in danger of losing its connection to
the traditions and values on which it was built.
Unfortunately, people who abhor these trends
often feel powerless, inadequate, and drained
in the face of the attendant subterfuge and
dissimulation.
In many countries, faceless bureaucratic sys-
tems control all levels of sport, and politics has
become almost a vocation within their national
offices, a job for professional administrators
and pragmatists rather than the idealists and
innovators of the past. The centralization of
power in national headquarters and national
sport centers, to a large extent, leads to a denial
of individuality.
Swimming needs enlightened and coura-
geous leadership to help meet these internal
transformations. Instead, the love of power
and personal prestige has become a preoccupa-
tion for many, and the old boys' network re-
mains a constituent part of the so-called Olym-
pic family.
There exists also the anomaly of an osten-
sible amateur body conducting a professional
sport. Many are convinced of the need for a
revised FINA constitution that would reflect
the changed nature of the sport, as well as
address the need for a more equitable voting
system that recognizes the contribution of
FINA's founding nations and the generations
of outstanding coaches whose knowledge and
experience have led to so much progress.
By giving special attention to the connective
tissue that binds each phase of the sport's de-
velopment, it may still be possible to take the
best from the past and add it to the present to
make a better future. With renewed pride in the
traditions of our sport, we may yet be able to
tackle the future with confidence, purpose, and
resolve.
xiv
PART I
Development
of Stroke
Fundamentals
History of the
Swimming Strokes
From the sparse descriptions on
record, early attempts at swimming
probably consisted of random arm
and leg movements with no spe-
cific techniques; otherwise, we
know little of the early history of
human swimming. Before orga-
nized competitive swimming
started in England, about 170 years
ago, there was little need to develop
methods beyond those that came
naturally to each individual.
The technical development of
swimming didn't start until the mid-
19th century with the building of
swimming pools, the invention of
the stopwatch, and the beginning
of competitive swimming as a for-
mal sport.
The first competitive swimmers
were more intent on developing
good style rather than speed. Grace-
ful and elegant movements, with a
minimum of splashing, were con-
sidered the hallmarks of style by
the early exponents of the sport.
This was evident in 1844, when
English swimmers saw the swim-
ming methods of visiting North
American Indians in London. Be-
cause the Indians' more advanced
overarm strokes were characterized
by wild splashing, their methods
were dismissed by the English as
unworthy of imitating.
3
Neither did the English know that across the
broad expanses of the Pacific Ocean, the inhabit-
ants of Polynesia and Melanesia had been swim-
ming with overarm strokes for more than a thou-
sand years. And along the coasts of South
America, Africa, and India, versions of the
trudgen stroke, another technique more advance
than those that existed in Western culture, had
been swum naturally for time immemorial.
Swimming in the Ancient World
Archaeologists know that humans developed
watercraft by 40,000 years ago, and so it's rea-
sonable to assume people were swimming by
that time (Nemecek 2000). Many of these early
swimming activities seem to have been part of
religious rituals, recreation, or military maneu-
vers.
Swimming is one of the oldest arts, if we are to
form an opinion from the fact that no trace of its
origin, discovery, invention or improvement is
to be found in any of the ancient writings.
-William Wilson (1883)
The first human swimmers most likely lived
by the sea or near warm rivers. Five thousand
years ago humans learned to divert rivers such
as the Nile, the Euphrates, and the Indus, and
it's likely that people living in these regions
were at home in the water and swam fre-
quently.
In the ancient world, diverting rivers to
protect city-states led to swimming for mili-
tary purposes. Bas-reliefs housed in the Brit-
ish Museum show a river crossing by Assur-
nasir-pal, King of Assyria, and his army. When
these reliefs were found in the ruins of the
royal palace at Nimroud, students of swim-
ming techniques were excited because here, at
last, they expected to find evidence of swim-
ming skills used in ancient times. Nineteenth-
century observers thought the reliefs showed
soldiers swimming either sidestroke or the
trudgen stroke, while 20th-century observers
concluded that the Assyrians were actually
swimming the crawl stroke! And so, as al-
ways, conclusions are drawn from one's own
vantage point.
The Baths of Caracalla and other baths built
by the Romans were enormous, but the swim-
ming tanks set aside for actual swimming were
very small. Those at Pompeii were only 13 feet
Descriptions in Ancient Literature
A nobleman of the Middle Kingdom of Egypt (2160–1780 в.с.) proudly recorded that his
children took swimming lessons with the king's children, but no mention is made of skills
being taught (Cureton 1934).
A few references to swimming are found in the Old Testament, but they, too, do not
elaborate on swimming skills possessed by ancient peoples. The following Biblical excerpts
must rank among the earliest references to swimming: ". . . he that swimmeth, spreadeth
forth his hands to swim" Isaiah 25:11 (approximately 760 в.с.) and “. . . a river that I could
not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed
over..." Ezekiel 47:5. (Ezekiel was exiled to Babylon in 597 в.с.)
Cursory references to swimming have been made over the centuries by the Egyptians,
Israelites, Accadians, Sumerians, Babylonians, Hittites, Greeks, Romans, and other ancient
nations. Much has been made of the fact that the Romans were said to have considered no
branch of education more important than swimming, but like the other accounts from
ancient times, they left few descriptions of methods they used.
Translations from Greece and Rome speak of swimmers using alternating overarm
motions, and it's possible that a type of overarm stroke may have been in common use long
ago. But this must remain pure conjecture because, as literate as the ancient Greeks and
Romans were, their writings give few descriptions of actual swimming techniques.
4
However, one rare and beautifully written passage was left to us by Manilius, a 1st-
century Roman poet, who waxes lyrical on the pleasures of swimming:
For just as the dolphin glides through the water on swift fins,
now rising above the surface and now sinking to the depths,
and piles up waves and sends them off in circles, just so will
each person born under the sign of the Dolphin fly through
the waves, raising one arm and then the other in slow arcs.
(Marcus Manilius (circa 14 A.D.), from Astronomica, an unfinished poem on
astronomy and astrology.)
One can envision the scene 2,000 years ago: a balmy day, a buoyant sea, and a skilled
swimmer performing, yes, a type of overarm stroke. Across the centuries, a fellow enthusiast
conveys with words his love of the water and his fascination with swimming propulsion. His
reference to dolphin swimming was prophetic in the extreme, as imitating the dolphin action
is the most successful adaptation humans have made from nature to their own swimming
propulsion. And he must have had sharp eyes, for he describes not only technique but even
the reacting vortex flows in the water, an unusual observation even today.
wide, and Cicero complained that he needed a
wider pool to avoid hurting his hands against
the wall. However, the baths of Mohenjo-Dario
in the Indus valley (in today's West Pakistan)
were somewhat larger. They measured 39 feet
long and 23 feet wide and were said to have
been the birthplace of a form of synchronized
swimming that served a religious function
(Cottrell 1960).
In the Middle Ages, swimming became un-
popular throughout Europe because people
believed water helped spread plague and other
common epidemics. When people did swim,
they preferred a form of breaststroke that kept
their faces out of the water. Not until the second
half of the 19th century was prejudice against
swimming largely overcome.
Swimming in the Western World
In 16th- and 17th-century Europe, the breast-
stroke was performed with the head held high
and completely out of the water (Thevenot
1699). Instead of using a frog kick, propulsion
was applied with the insteps and not the soles
of the feet (Muths 1798).
Early in the 19th century, breaststroke swim-
mers adopted a frog kick in which the ankles
were dorsi-flexed and propulsion developed
by pressing the soles of the feet against the
water (Counsilman 1968). As the stroke tech-
nique developed, so did the drills used by
swimmers, although some of these drills were
strange (figure 1.1). Debate followed on whether
using the soles of the feet in the frog kick
yielded more propulsion than spreading the
legs and then straightening them before clos-
ing in a tight wedge, such as the kick shown in
figure 1.2 (Thomas 1904).
5
Such discussions on the most efficient use of
the legs in the breaststroke kick marked the
beginning of technical thinking and a growing
interest in improving propulsion. Understand-
ing the positive effect that could be achieved by
a slight change of technique was (and is) sig-
nificant; this ability later was to prove an im-
portant characteristic of a capable coach.
Figure 1.1 In the 19th century, breaststroke drills
were weird and wonderful. From Dalton 1899.
Figure 1.2 The wedge kick style of breaststroke used in the 19th century. From Wilson 1883.
Charles Steedman (1867) was probably the
first to caution against drawing the knees
forward under the body when swimming
breaststroke (figure 1.3). He said that this nega-
tive or retarding action caused resistance and
retarded the progress of the swimmer. He said
that by "bending the knees laterally, rather
than under the body the draught of the latter
is decreased, or, in other words, the whole of
the body remains nearer the surface of the
water, and consequently the resistance to its
progress is much less" (p. 93).
takes to a great extent account for the too often
unsuccessful efforts made by those who wish to
teach themselves.” Wilson said that the major
propulsion should be obtained from the leg kick
