Complete Guide to
PRIMARY SWIMMING
Teaching strokes and
skills in a safe and fun
environment
John Lawton

This page intentionally left blank.

Complete Guide to
PRIMARY
SWIMMING
John Lawton
Human Kinetics

Lawton, John, 1952-
Complete guide to primary swimming / John Lawton.
p. cm. (Complete guides.)
1. Swimming--Training. I. Title.
GV837.7.L97 2013
797.21--dc23
2012044935
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN-10: 1-4504-0153-8 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-1-4504-0153-1 (print)
Copyright © 2013 by John Lawton
This book is copyrighted under the Berne Convention. All rights are reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of private study, research, criticism, or review, as permitted
under the Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
electrical, chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publisher.
Notice: Permission to reproduce the following material is granted to instructors and agencies who have purchased Complete Guide to Primary Swimming: pp. 18 and 28. The reproduction
of other parts of this book is expressly forbidden by the above copyright notice.
Persons or agencies who have not purchased Complete Guide to Primary Swimming may not reproduce
any material.
The web addresses cited in this text were current as of November 28, 2012, unless otherwise noted.
Acquisitions Editors: John Dickinson and Scott Wikgren; Developmental Editor: Ray Vallese; Assistant Editor: Derek Campbell; Copyeditor: Joanna Hatzopoulos Portman;
Permissions Manager: Dalene Reeder; Graphic Designer: Nancy Rasmus; Graphic Artist: Denise Lowry; Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg; Photograph (cover): Human Kinetics;
Photographs (interior): Human Kinetics, unless otherwise noted; chapter-opening photo Photodisc/Getty Images; photo on p. 16 Eyewire; Photo Asset Manager: Laura Fitch;
Visual Production Assistant: Joyce Brumfield; Photo Production Manager: Jason Allen; Art Manager: Kelly Hendren; Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn; Illustrations:
Human Kinetics; Printer: United Graphics
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 5 4 3 2 1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
Website: www.Human Kinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics, P.O. Box 5076, Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics, 475 Devonshire Road Unit 100, Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics, 107 Bradford Road, Stanningley, Leeds LS28 6AT, United
Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia: Human Kinetics, 57A Price Avenue, Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics, P.O. Box 80, Torrens Park, South Australia 5062
0800 222 062
e-mail: info@hknewzealand.com
E5289

Contents
How to Use This Book vii
UNIT 1 Planning
Outcome 1
Developing a Whole-School Approach 2
Organisation and Delivery 2
Health and Safety 3
Who Can Teach Swimming? 6
Additional Adult Support 7
Teaching From the Poolside or in the Water 7
Working Effectively With a Group 8
Evaluating Your Programme and Planning for the Future 9
Looking Beyond the School Day 9
Where to Start: A Few Guiding Thoughts 9
Developing Your Whole-School Swimming Guidance
Document 11
1
UNIT 2 Preparation and Familiarisation
Outcomes 13
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 14
Outcome 2.1
13
Outcome 2.2
15
Be introduced to the pool environment and the teaching
staff.
15
Be aware of the processes and procedures related to
attending a swimming lesson and have the opportunity
to clarify any concerns.
Outcome 2.3
16
Complete a land-based evacuation procedure.
Preswimming Checklist 17
Worksheet 1: Let's Think About Swimming 18

iv
Contents
UNIT 3 Starting to Move
Outcomes
19
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 20
Outcome 3.1
.......
Know and be able to explain the safety requirements
of the pool as appropriate to the lesson.
Outcome 3.2
a. Be able to enter and exit the water safely; be able to
move around the pool with feet on the bottom and with
confidence.
b. Be able to carry out evacuation procedures safely and
within an appropriate length of time.
Outcome 3.3
...
Be comfortable participating in various games and fun
activities related to early movement.
21
Unit 3 Checklist 27
Worksheet 2: Pool Safety 28
22
19
25
UNIT 4 Face in the Water
Outcomes 29
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 30
Outcome 4.1
29
Outcome 4.3
36
Be introduced to aspects related to water safety away
from the pool environment.
31
Unit 4 Checklist 37
Be comfortable putting the face in the water.
Outcome 4.2
33
....
a. Be introduced to the initial stage of aquatic breathing
and be comfortable with water in the mouth.
b. Be introduced to the benefits of exercise.
UNIT 5 Learning to Float
Outcomes 39
39
Outcome 5.2
44
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 40
Outcome 5.1
Be comfortable floating on the front and back, and be
able to regain the standing position.
41
Be able to combine floating on the front and back
showing rotation and balance, and be able to develop
floating sequences.
Unit 5 Checklist 46

v
Contents
UNIT 6 Submersion and Aquatic Breathing
Outcome 47
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 48
Outcome 6.1
..
Be comfortable going under the water and be able to
show controlled inhalation and exhalation over a
period of time.
Unit 6 Checklist 51
Contents
47
48
UNIT 7 Gliding and Developing the Body Position
Outcomes
53
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 54
53
Outcome 7.2
58
...
Outcome 7.1
55
Be able to glide on the front and the back combined
with kicking and rotation.
Be able to glide on the front with the face in the water
and the arms at the sides and extended, and be able to
float on the back with the arms at the sides.
Outcome 7.3
59
..
...
Be able to glide on the back combined with kicking
and with sculling action.
Unit 7 Checklist
61
UNIT 8 Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
Outcomes
63
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 64
Outcome 8.1
63
Outcome 8.3
74
65
Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills
appropriate to this stage of development.
Be able to swim on the back with the legs kicking up
and down and the arms performing an alternating
over-the-water recovery.
..
Outcome 8.2
68
Outcome 8.4
Describe each stroke covered in this unit, and suggest
ways to bring about improvement.
Unit 8 Checklist 76
76
•
Be able to swim on the front with the legs kicking up
and down and the arms performing an alternating
over-the-water recovery.

vi
Contents
UNIT 9 Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
77
Outcomes
77
Outcome 9.3
90
..
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 78
Outcome 9.1
79
Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills
appropriate to this stage of development.
•
Unit 9 Checklist 94
Perform a basic breaststroke with control.
Outcome 9.2
85
Perform a basic butterfly with control.
UNIT 10 Further Development of the Four Major Strokes and Aquatic Skills
95
Outcomes
95
Outcome 10.1d
103
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 96
Swim butterfly over longer distances showing good
control.
Outcome 10.1a
97
Swim backstroke over longer distances showing good
control.
Outcome 10.2
105
•
Be able to combine strokes and skills to perform aquatic
circuits.
Outcome 10.1b
100
Unit 10 Checklist 106
Swim front crawl over longer distances showing good
control.
Further Development 106
Outcome 10.1c
102
Swim breaststroke over longer distances showing good
control.
Appendix 107
About the Author 110

How to Use This Book
C
omplete Guide to Primary Swimming is designed to support the
teaching of swimming in schools. The model for teaching swimming
in UK schools varies considerably. Some schools use external quali-
fied swimming teachers, some use a combination of external qualified
swimming teachers and schoolteachers and some use schoolteachers
only. Although this book is targeted towards schoolteachers with limited
knowledge and experience in the teaching of swimming, experienced
swimming teachers in schools and recreational settings can benefit
from the easy-to-follow structure that this book provides and that is
sometimes missing from learn-to-swim programmes.
The importance of learning to swim is widely recognised through-
out society. Most parents and schools consider swimming to be an
essential life skill. However, the teaching of swimming is often viewed
as a complicated process, and many schoolteachers question their
ability to deliver an effective swimming programme. Complete Guide
to Primary Swimming aims to demystify this process and to provide a
clearly defined series of steps that, if followed, will enable teachers to
teach effectively and learners to develop a range of skills in a safe and
fun environment. Underpinning this goal is a belief that schoolteachers
already have a range of skills and an expertise that can be transferred
to the pool environment with great success.
Developmental Units
Designed as a practical guide, this book is made up of developmental
units. Unit 1 deals with planning. It provides clear guidance on important
considerations before a swimming programme is introduced, which is
especially helpful for schools introducing swimming into the curriculum
for the first time. A guidance checklist provides an easy mechanism to
ensure that all the major aspects have been considered.
Each subsequent unit contains easy-to-follow, sequential activities
supported by teaching tips. Each unit has a number of clearly identi-
fied outcomes and a checklist to ensure that all the key skills have been
achieved before moving to the next unit. Because the activities build on
skills developed in previous units, your swimming programme should
follow the units in the order listed. This logical and progressive struc-
ture ensures that swimmers develop a range of skills that underpin and
complement the learning of the four major swimming strokes. A mix-
and-match approach may lead to omitting some key skills, which may
have a direct effect on skills developed later in the programme.
Note that each developmental unit does not correspond to one lesson.
You can develop specific lesson plans only after considering the needs
of the learners and the teaching environment. It is likely that each unit
will cover a number of lessons; the exact number will vary according
to many factors, such as the ability of the learners, the length of the
sessions and the effectiveness of the teaching. However, it is not always
necessary to start at unit 2, particularly if swimmers have had some
previous experience. Use your own professional judgement along with
the checklist that appears at the end of each unit. For example, if the
swimmers are considered good enough to start at unit 4, use the unit
3 checklist to ensure that they can complete the full range of skills
required by that point. If they cannot complete the required skills, spend
time revising and ensuring that all the skills have been learned before
moving to unit 4.
vii

viii
How to Use This Book
Appendix
The appendix provides sources of additional information for further
guidance and support, including the following:
• Pupil-to-teacher ratios
• Incentive awards
•
Equipment and teaching aids
• Useful contacts
Links to the National Curriculum
Throughout each unit, links are made to the National Curriculum for
Physical Education (NCPE) for England, key stages (KS) 1 and 2. (The
NCPE Handbook is available to purchase from the Department for Educa-
tion, Publications Department, Castle View House, East Lane, Runcorn,
Cheshire WA7 2GJ, or it can be downloaded from www.education.gov.
uk.) Although the NCPE is the main focus for these links, additional links
to personal, social and health education (PSHE) are made. Teachers
should also look for links that can be made with other curriculum areas.
The NCPE identifies four aspects of teaching and learning that are
necessary during each key stage of learning:
Key Stage 1
1. Acquiring and developing skills
a. Exploring basic skills, actions and ideas with increasing
understanding
b. Remembering and repeating simple skills and actions with
increasing control and coordination
2. Selecting and applying skills, tactics and compositional ideas
a. Exploring how to choose and apply skills and actions in
sequence and in combination
b. Varying the way they perform skills by using simple tactics
and movement phrases
c. Applying rules and conventions for different activities
3. Evaluating and improving performance
a. Describing what they have done
b. Observing, describing and copying what others have done
c. Using what they have learnt to improve the quality and control
of their work
4. Knowledge and understanding of fitness and health
a. Recognising the importance of being active
b. Recognising and describing how their bodies feel during dif-
ferent activities
Key Stage 2
1. Acquiring and developing skills
a. Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones
b. Performing actions and skills with more consistent control
and quality
2. Selecting and applying skills, tactics and compositional ideas
a. Planning, using and adapting strategies, tactics and composi-
tional ideas for individual, pair, small-group and small-team
activities
b. Developing and using their knowledge of the principles behind
the strategies, tactics and ideas to improve their effectiveness
c. Applying rules and conventions for different activities
3. Evaluating and improving performance
a. Identifying what makes a performance effective
b. Suggesting improvements based on this information
4. Knowledge and understanding of fitness and health
a. Knowing how exercise affects the body in the short term
b. Warming up and preparing appropriately for different activi-
ties
c. Knowing why physical activity is good for their health and
well-being
d. Knowing why wearing appropriate clothing and being hygienic
is good for their health and safety
Reprinted from Department of Education, 2011, National curriculum for physical education (Ottawa,
Canada: Crown Copyright).

ix
How to Use This Book
Programme of Study
Within the context of swimming activities and water safety, the pro-
gramme of study can be delivered at KS1 (normally 5–7 years) and/or
KS2 (8-11 years). However, a best practice would be to have a swimming
programme that covers both key stages.
The programme of study for swimming activities and water safety as
described in the NCPE is as follows:
1. At KS1, swimmers should be taught to
a. move in water; for example, jump, walk, hop and spin, using
swimming aids and support.
b. float and move with and without swimming aids.
c. feel the buoyancy and support of water and swimming aids.
d. propel themselves in water using different swimming aids,
arm and leg actions and basic strokes.
2. At KS2, swimmers should be taught to
a. pace themselves in floating and swimming challenges related
to speed, distance and personal survival.
b. swim unaided for a sustained period of time over a distance
of at least 25 metres.
c. use recognised arm and leg actions whilst lying on the front
and the back.
d. use a range of recognised strokes and personal survival skills
such as front crawl, backstroke, breaststroke, sculling, float-
ing and surface diving.
Reprinted from Department of Education, 2011, National curriculum for physical education (Ottawa,
Canada: Crown Copyright).
The National Curriculum (NC) is a minimum entitlement, but this
book aims to take swimmers beyond the minimum to ensure that they
are able to complete the four recognised strokes and a range of skills
with confidence whilst also being comfortable in and around water.
The NC is developed by and is the responsibility of the Department
for Education. The information provided in the previous text is taken
from the revised NC dated September 2000.
National Curriculum Review
At the time of this writing, the Department for Education has embarked
upon a review of the NC, and changes are anticipated for September
2014. A revised curriculum will not affect the relevance and validity
of the progressions and activities contained within Complete Guide to
Primary Swimming, although specific links between the activities and
the requirements of the NCPE may need to be reviewed.
Time to Get Going
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming is a practical book that you should
take to and use on the poolside. Time for the planning of swimming les-
sons can be limited; therefore you can use this publication as a constant
source of reference.
The ability to swim is a gift that all children should be given; this life
skill will open up endless opportunities to enhance each child's quality
of life. This guide will assist all those involved in the teaching of swim-
ming to provide a safe and stimulating programme that will provide
the platform for ongoing future development.


This page intentionally left blank.

Planning
OUTCOME
At the end of this unit, you should be able to meet the following outcome:
1.1: Develop a whole-school approach to teaching swimming.
UNIT
1
1

2
E
ffective planning contributes significantly to the quality of your
programme. Whilst classroom teachers are familiar with the key
aspects of planning, swimming presents its own unique challenges. For
example, swimming often takes place off site in a facility that is owned
or managed by a third party. In such cases, close collaboration with the
management is essential to ensure that appropriate provisions are made
and that any potentially conflicting demands, such as shared school and
community use, can be effectively managed. Even when a school has a
swimming pool on site or is able to access a pool in another school, you
must consider many factors unique to swimming. They are identified
in the next section.
Schools, communities and local facilities share many common
aspects, and they also have their own particular requirements. There-
fore, it is not possible to identify all aspects that should be considered
in the planning stage. The considerations discussed in the next section
provide you with a basis for whole-school planning and help to ensure
that the swimming programme can be delivered in a safe and effective
learning environment.
Developing a Whole-School Approach
In this context, a whole-school approach refers to the way in which
the whole school have involvement in the planning of the swimming
programme to ensure that learning opportunities are maximised not
only within the context of swimming but also in relation to the wider
curriculum. In addition, a whole-school approach should develop a clear
understanding of the intended outcomes of the swimming programme
and the steps required to achieve the outcomes.
The National Curriculum (NC) is in a period of potential change.
However, it is currently nonprescriptive in terms of which year groups
should attend swimming, and it states merely that a swimming pro-
gramme should exist at key stages 1 and/or 2. Whilst it is difficult to
speculate on any changes that may be made in the future, this aspect
is anticipated to remain. When considering which year groups to take
swimming, you should take local circumstances into account. For
example, some areas may have many children whose parents have taken
them swimming from a very early age, whilst other areas may have
children who are about to experience swimming for the first time at
school. Both of these scenarios can have a significant influence on the
type of swimming programme offered and the age at which a swimming
programme may best be delivered. Some schools are in the fortunate
position where children may swim every year throughout the primary
school, but others have to be more selective because they must effectively
use a finite amount of time across all curriculum areas.
In general terms, the nature, content, and duration of a school swim-
ming programme is influenced by a number of factors, including access
to a pool, travel distance and travel time, priority placed on swimming
in the school, expertise and commitment of the teaching staff and size
of the budget allocated to swimming. A school with a pool on site is
likely to have more opportunities to develop a comprehensive swimming
programme than one that has a considerable distance to travel, although
good organisation and good links to other facilities and swimming
providers can often make up for difficulties in accessing and travelling
to a swimming facility. When planning a school programme, you must
also look beyond the school day and explore opportunities that may be
available for all learners to continue aquatic activity as part of a local
community programme. This will help to enhance the swimming provi-
sion available to them.
Organisation and Delivery
Swimming teachers have discussed the ideal age to introduce young
people to a swimming programme at great length without reaching any
consensus. A persuasive argument exists for beginning as early as pos-
sible as a means of reducing the fear factor, but an alternative argument
states that beginning a programme when children already have better
developed coordination and a degree of independence has benefits. The
characteristics of the local community make a difference, too. If the
culture is one where swimming is an integral part of family activity, the
need to take young people from a very early age may not be so great.
However, if swimming is not an integral part of the culture of the local
community, taking children from an earlier age may have benefits. In
addition, the facility may be a factor to consider because taking very
small children to a swimming pool with limited shallow water is more
demanding in terms of the number of support staff required.
Number of Lessons
What is a reasonable number of lessons to have up to the end of key
stage 2? No magic figure exists that indicates how many lessons a

Planning
non-swimmer requires to achieve the level of being safe, confident and
competent in and around water. However, it is often the case that young
novice swimmers will progress more quickly if the programme offered
provides regular and frequent opportunities. It is important to recognise
that how children learn should take priority over organisational conve-
nience. For example, some evidence suggests that nonswimmers improve
more quickly when participating in intensive lessons (for example, three
lessons per week over 4 or 5 weeks rather than the traditional weekly les-
sons). However, for those children who can already swim, a programme
spaced over a longer period of time may result in less susceptibility to
problems of regression. It is clear that an effective swimming programme
includes regular lessons delivered over a significant period of time
repeated at different points throughout key stages 1 and 2. For example,
it is unlikely that a half-term block delivered once throughout the two
key stages will have a significant impact on swimming abilities unless
it is part of a comprehensive programme linked to the extended school
day or a local community programme. A programme that is planned to
meet only the minimum statutory requirements in respect to ensuring
that the learners have access to swimming rather than one that meets
their specific needs is unsatisfactory for swimmer development and
indefensible in terms of the effective use of school time.
Duration of Lessons
Is the 30-minute lesson, often reduced to 20 to 25 minutes after chang-
ing time is factored in, the most appropriate time period for effective
learning? For very young people being introduced to swimming and who
may find the water and pool environment cold, 20 to 25 minutes may
be ideal. However, for older learners who may be competent swimmers,
20 to 25 minutes may not provide the opportunity for a programme
that is challenging and meets their particular needs. Subject to the
logistics, a school may have different time allocations based on age
and ability. For example, it may be that children in years 1 to 3 attend
swimming on a weekly basis for periods of around 30 minutes whilst
those in years 4 to 6 attend every second week but for 45 to 60 minutes.
An additional consideration is travelling time. Depending on where
the pool is, a 25-minute lesson could take upwards of 1 1/2 hours. In
such circumstances, consider whether it would be a better use of time
to have a much longer lesson, perhaps delivered every 2 weeks rather
than every week.
Skills and Expertise for Delivery
Do those involved in the planning and delivery of the swimming pro-
gramme have the skills and expertise to motivate and improve the
children's aquatic ability, or is additional training required? Teaching
assistants, parents and secondary students involved in courses such
as Sports Leaders may have skills and expertise to complement those
available on the school staff and may have some time available to help
your swimming programme. In addition, some of them may have spe-
cific swimming teaching or coaching qualifications and may be happy
to volunteer to assist with the delivery of the school programme, both
in and out of school.
In addition, consider the number of staff required to ensure that the
size of groups is appropriate to the developmental stage of the learn-
ers. Clear evidence exists (Lawton, J. 2007. Department for Education
National Top Up Scheme Review; published by ASA and Department for
Education-see the contacts list in the appendix) that small group size
was probably the most important factor in bringing about significant
improvement in those previously considered to be reluctant swimmers.
Finally, consider the possibilities of establishing links with other learn-
to-swim providers in the community who have trained and qualified
swimming teachers. You might use these teachers to support the school
swimming programme delivered as part of the school curriculum or as
part of the extended day.
Health and Safety
Schools and other organisations that teach swimming have a duty to
consider the health and safety of children. One element of this duty of
care is to minimise risk to learners and teachers. Teachers are constantly
managing risk in the classroom and the playground; the swimming pool
is no different. In simple terms, to minimise risk you are required to
do the following:
• Identify possible areas of risk.
• Take steps to reduce the level of risk.
Every swimming pool is required to have pool safety operating proce-
dures (PSOPs) in place that are reviewed on a regular basis. This normally
consists of the normal operating procedure (NOP) and the emergency
action plan (EAP) for the pool, changing facilities and associated plant
3

4
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
and equipment. The NOP should set out the way a pool operates on a
daily basis. It should include details of the layout, equipment, manner of
use, user group characteristics and any hazards or activity-related risks.
The EAP should give specific instructions on the action to be taken in
the event of an emergency. All staff involved in the organisation or
teaching of swimming should be familiar with the relevant sections
of the PSOPs and they should practise the EAP on a regular basis and
record details.
If you deliver a swimming programme at a local leisure centre or
similar, you can be almost guaranteed that the PSOP will be in place,
although it is appropriate to ask for a copy. Certain aspects will be of
little interest (for example, the operation of the plant) whereas other
aspects, such as the evacuation procedures, will be relevant. You should
identify those aspects that affect you most and ensure that all those
involved in the delivery of the programme have all the information
that they need. In addition, you should practise some aspects, such
as the pool evacuation procedures, to ensure that all staff and learn-
ers are aware of what to do in an emergency. When you rehearse the
evacuation procedures, you should document this to provide evidence
should it be needed.
Other safety-related factors to consider include lifeguards, pool
design, water depth, water quality, pool organisation, staffing and
pupil-to-teacher ratios.
Lifeguards
A lifeguard must be available whenever a school swimming lesson is
taking place. Ideally the lifeguard is a designated person with an appro-
priate nationally recognised lifeguard qualification. The publication
Managing Health and Safety in Swimming Pools (Health and Safety
Executive 2003; available in PDF format at www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/
hsg179.htm) states that in certain circumstances, a swimming teacher
may fulfil a dual role of swimming teacher and lifeguard, but this role
is subject to being trained to carry out a rescue and provide basic life
support. This only applies to programmed swimming, which is defined
as having a formal structure, disciplined, supervised and continuously
monitored from the poolside.
Generally, although not always, if the swimming programme is deliv-
ered in a local authority pool or a similar facility, it is a requirement of
hire to have one or more qualified lifeguards from the facility in atten-
dance to cover for emergencies. Many teachers prefer this arrangement
because it allows them to focus on the teaching without this additional
responsibility. However, some pools require all those working on the
poolside to have also undertaken some form of safety training in order
to provide additional support to the lifeguard. It is essential that you
know and implement the exact requirements related to lifeguarding at
the facility. Irrespective of the requirements that are in place related to
safe supervision, best practice would dictate that all those working on
the poolside have some basic training in safety. Prompt and appropri-
ate intervention can often prevent a minor safety issue from developing
into something much more serious. If required, most facility providers
will be delighted to organise and deliver appropriate safety training to
help ensure that the swimming programme is delivered in the safest
possible environment.
Pool Design
Consider the suitability of the general design of the pool area for teach-
ing. Some leisure-type pools (not normally found on school sites but
could be in a joint use facility), particularly those with features such as
flumes, fountains and wave machines, are not ideal for teaching swim-
ming and, where they are used, may require additional supervision.
Water Depth
Consider the importance of water depth in relation to the ability and
height of the learners. Pools with a large expanse of shallow water have
considerable benefits in terms of teaching novice swimmers. Where
limited shallow water exists, you'll need to consider how to designate
shallow and deep water and take steps to ensure that nonswimmers
cannot inadvertently drift into deep water.
Water Quality
Consider the effects of temperature and water clarity. When teaching
young people to swim, it is important to provide an inviting pool envi-
ronment and warm water. Aim for a water temperature in the region
of 28 degrees Celsius. A well-maintained pool will have clear, sparkling
water where, even in the deepest parts of the pool, the floor is clearly
visible. However, from time to time, the water may become cloudy. If

Planning
this occurs to such an extent that you cannot see the pool floor, you
should postpone lessons until the matter is rectified.
Pool Organisation
In many instances, schools have exclusive use of the swimming pool
when delivering lessons. However, this is not always the case, particularly
where a local authority pool is used. In these instances, the areas to be
used by the school and the public must be clearly designated through
the use of pool dividers such as lane ropes or portable booms. When
working in a shared use situation, some schools have found it helpful to
require swimmers to wear particular coloured swimming caps to ensure
that they can be quickly and easily identified. In shared use pools, it is
also essential to clarify with the management of the facility the exact
provision for lifeguard cover and who is responsible for what.
Staffing
As with all curriculum areas, having a skilled and knowledgeable work-
force is essential in terms of the quality of the programme delivered,
and it is the head teacher's responsibility to ensure that teachers are
competent to carry out their roles safely and effectively. In cases where a
combination of external swimming teachers and classroom teachers give
lessons, it is important to allocate time to ensure that both parties can
contribute to all aspects related to planning and delivery. Combining the
skills and knowledge of the schoolteacher with the specialist knowledge
of a fully qualified swimming teacher provides the best basis for a suc-
cessful programme. In some instances, the time given for schoolteachers
and swimming teachers to meet is restricted to the 5 or 10 minutes before
or after a lesson; this is clearly insufficient. For a successful programme,
you must allocate appropriate time to ensure that all aspects of planning
and delivery can be fully addressed. See Duty of Care and Working With
the Swimming Teacher for additional guidance on working with your
swimming teacher.
Pupil-to-Teacher Ratios
Guidelines related to the recommended number of learners for each
teacher are often provided by the Local Education Authority (LEA)
and by national organisations such as the Amateur Swimming Asso-
ciation (ASA), which is the governing body for swimming throughout
England. Such guidelines are usually based on the number of learners
considered reasonable for a teacher to manage safely. When determining
the number of learners allocated to each member of staff, you should
consider factors such as age, ability, size in relation to the pool depth,
the expertise and experience of the teacher, the environment in which
the teaching will take place and whether there are any specific learning
or behavioural difficulties.
Whilst these guidelines are useful when planning and organising the
teaching of swimming, they cannot take into account the particular
circumstances in which the teacher operates, and actual numbers need
to be based on local conditions. Examples of circumstances that might
dictate that the ratios be lower than those stated include the following:
•
• A wide variation in swimming ability
Language, learning, physical or behavioural difficulties
While guidelines exist for pupil-to-teacher ratios, the actual numbers need to fit local
conditions.


6
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
•
• A large water area
Deep water areas into which swimmers with poor ability could
stray
• Glare or reflection causing lack of visibility beneath the water
surface
• Availability of assistance in the water
For specific details on pupil-to-teacher ratios, see the appendix.
Note that the NC requires all schoolchildren to learn about health and
safety and identifying risks and hazards. Helping learners to identify
and control risk is an important aspect of this requirement.
Who Can Teach Swimming?
In schools with a pool on site, it is likely that most if not all of the
classroom teachers and many classroom assistants will be involved
in the delivery of the swimming programme. Many teaching skills are
generic; strategies used in the classroom for areas such as managing
behaviour, differentiating tasks, working with different ability groups
and planning a learning programme can be transferred to the pool
environment with great effect. Other aspects, such as the organisation
of a swimming lesson or positioning for effective communication, have
some pool-specific applications. However, in many instances the missing
ingredient is often not how to teach but what to teach.
The issue of who can teach swimming is related to competence and
may be defined as 'having the skills, knowledge, understanding and
expertise necessary to plan, deliver and evaluate the programme' (Whit-
lam, J. 2012. Safe Practice in Physical Education and Sport. Association
for Physical Education). Teachers have a responsibility to be able to
teach swimming in a safe environment with a sound understanding of
the needs and stages of development of all the learners in their care.
Therefore, some teachers may have to engage in swimming-specific
professional development.
Duty of Care
Teachers have overall responsibility for learners regardless of who may be
actually engaged in teaching them. This responsibility includes lesson con-
tent. It equally applies if a school employs an external swimming teacher
either to work largely independently or to work alongside the classroom
teacher. In this situation,