Sebastian Fischer | Armin Kibele (Eds.)
contemporary
swim start research
Conference Book: Young Experts' Workshop
on Swim Start Research 2015
MEYER
& MEYER
SPORT

Sebastian Fischer & Armin Kibele (Eds.)
Contemporary Swim Start Research

To Gunnar, Johan, and Julien,
who could not attend the conference!

Sebastian Fischer & Armin Kibele (Eds.)
CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
Conference Book: Young Experts' Workshop
on Swim Start Research 2015
Meyer & Meyer Sport

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Contemporary Swim Start Research
Maidenhead: Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd., 2017
ISBN 978-1-78255-783-8
All rights reserved, especially the right to copy and distribute, including the translation rights.
No part of this work may be reproduced-including by photocopy, microfilm or any other means-
processed, stored electronically, copied or distributed in any form whatsoever without the written
permission of the publisher.
©2017 by Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd.
1st edition 2017
Auckland, Beirut, Dubai, Hägendorf, Hong Kong, Indianapolis, Cairo, Cape Town,
Manila, Maidenhead, New Delhi, Singapore, Sydney, Tehran, Vienna
Member of the World Sport Publishers' Association (WSPA)
www.w-s-p-a.org
ISBN: 978-1-78255-783-8
E-Mail: info@m-m-sports.com
www.m-m-sports.com

CONTENTS
PREFACE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CHAPTER 1: How Important is the Underwater Phase
to Elite Swimming Start Performance?
CONTENTS
9
9
10
Elaine Tor, Victoria University, Australia
Introduction
10
Background
11
Characteristics of an Elite Swimming Start
15
Key Parameters of the Swimming Start
17
Three Common Underwater Trajectories
18
How Does Drag Affect the Underwater Phase of
the Swimming Start?
20
Chapter Summary
23
References
24
CHAPTER 2: Underwater Gliding and Undulatory Swimming
After Start: Biomechanics and Motor Control
Approaches
28
Marc Elipot, Université Paris Descartes, France
Introduction
28
General Mechanisms
28
The Underwater Gliding Phase
31
Underwater Undulatory Swimming
34
Transition Phase
35
Performance Improvement and Motor Learning
37
Conclusions and Applied Recommendations
40
References
41
CHAPTER 3: Positioning Issues on the OSB11
44
Sebastian Fischer, University of Kassel, Germany
Introduction
44
Methods
45
Results
47
Discussion
48
Conclusion
48
References
49
5

6
CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
CHAPTER 4: Evaluating Relay Starts in Swimming
50
Sebastian Fischer, University of Kassel, Germany
Introduction
50
Study 1: Is Relay Start More Effective Than
Individual Race Start?
50
Study 2: When to Initiate the Relay Start Take-Off?
52
Study 3: Relay Start Techniques in International
Swimming Championships
56
References
57
CHAPTER 5: Backstroke Start Technique from Feet Immersed
until Current Handgrips Configuration:
An Overview of Findings
60
Karla de Jesus, University of Porto, Portugal
Introduction
60
Methods
61
Results and Discussion
61
Practical Conclusions and Recommendations for Coaches
References
64
65
CHAPTER 6: Backstroke Start Technique Performed under
the Current FINA Rules: A Study Focusing on the
New Backstroke Start Wedge
68
Kelly de Jesus, University of Porto, Portugal
Introduction
68
Methods
69
Results and Discussion
70
Conclusion
73
Practical Applications
73
References
74
CHAPTER 7: Effect of Rear Foot and Back Plate in the
Swimming Start Performance
76
Sonia Taladriz, University of Granada, Spain
Introduction
76
Grab Start Vs Kick-Start: Differences and Similarities
78
Angular Momentum in the Kick Start
82
Conclusion
85
References
85

7
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 8: Postactivation Potentiation in Sprint Swimming
90
Francisco Cuenca-Fernández, University of Granada, Spain
Introduction
90
Methods
93
Results and Discussion
95
Current Studies and Future Perspectives
97
Conclusion
98
References
98
CHAPTER 9: The PAS-S Swim Start, Turn and
Relay Changeover Analysis System
102
Bruce R. Mason and Colin MacIntosh,
The AppSen Company, Brogo, N.S.W., Australia
Introduction
102
The PAS-S Hardware
104
The PAS-S Software
108
Initial Setup of PAS-S
109
The Mode of Operation
113
The Analysis Output
114
Other Valuable Features of PAS-S
121
References
121
CREDITS
124


PREFACE
This book includes contemporary studies on swim starts conducted by young
scientists from around the world. The various topics relate to individual starts from
the block, backstroke starts, and relay starts highlighting different aspects and
phases of the corresponding movement behavior.
Most of the studies published in this book have been presented during the 2015
Young Experts Workshop of Swim Start Research supported by the Federal Institute
of Sport Science in Germany.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The conference on which this book is based on was financially supported by the
Federal Institute for Sport Science in Germany.
9

CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
CHAPTER 1:
HOW IMPORTANT IS THE UNDERWATER PHASE TO ELITE
SWIMMING START PERFORMANCE?
Elaine Tor, Victoria University, Australia
10
Introduction
The swimming dive start is a complex movement involving the reaction to a
stimulus; the coordination of explosive movements of the arms, trunk, and
legs to propel the body forward with maximum velocity; and the ability to
maintain a streamlined position to minimize the loss of horizontal velocity
in the water (Guimaraes & Hay, 1985). The international rules of swimming
dictate that swimmers must resurface from the underwater phase before the
15m mark following starts in all strokes except for breaststroke (FINA, 2010).
Total start time for elite swimmers is typically between six to eight seconds
and is the time from the starting signal to when the center of the swimmer's
head reaches the 15m mark (Cossor & Mason, 2001).
The start phase is typically broken into three phases for analysis: on-block, flight, and
underwater. A number of start techniques have been examined in the literature as a
result of new techniques being developed and changes in the start block itself. With
the introduction of the Omega OSB11 starting blocks to international competition,
many swimmers are now using a new kick-start technique during competition. The
new start block surface consists of two components: the main platform, which is
angled at 10 degrees; and an adjustable back plate, foot rest, or kick plate, which
is angled at 30 degrees to the main deck. The latter can be moved through five
consecutive steps of 35 mm that start 350 mm from the front edge of the block. The
performance differences between the 'kick-start' technique and earlier styles (such
as the track start, grab start, and swing start) mean that previous start literature
may not be relevant to what swimmers are currently employing during competition.
Research concerning the on-block and flight phase of the kick start has established
that utilizing the kick plate would allow swimmers to generate larger horizontal take-
off velocities, which translate into faster start performances (Honda et al., 2010).
The contribution of the underwater phase of the kick start has also been evaluated
and found to be important to overall start performance, particularly the trajectory
adopted by the swimmer to reduce the amount of drag acting on the swimmer (Tor
et al., 2015c).
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
The start in swimming is crucial to performance in competition. Hence, this chapter
will summarize start literature and distinguish characteristics of the elite swimming
kick-start with particular emphasis on the underwater phase. The underwater
phase-the longest phase of swimming—has been identified as the most important
part of the start and is the point at which the swimmer is travelling the fastest through
the water. A number of different aspects of the swimming start's underwater phase
will also be explored. This phase contributes to guidelines for the ideal underwater
trajectory swimmers should adopt to reduce the amount of drag acting on them.
Background
Importance of the Swimming Start
Start times have been shown to be influential
to overall performance during competition,
contributing between 1-26% of total race time
depending on the distance of the event (Lyttle
& Benjanuvatra, 2005; Mason et al., 2007; Tor
et al., 2014b). Race analysis at the 1998 World
Swimming Championships in Perth showed
high correlations between start time and overall
performance, particularly in events 100 m or
less (Mason, 1999). Further, in correlational
analysis of nine international competitions over
a seven-year period, Robertson et al. (2009) observed that fast starts were the
most successful strategy in shorter events for improving performance. Additionally,
Girold et al. (2001) found that for the women's 200 m freestyle, the first 50 meters
of the race was the most important variable for medalists at the Sydney Olympics.
Subsequently, any small improvements in time gained during the start phase of the
race can be advantageous to many elite swimmers, as they may result in significant
improvements to overall competition performance (Breed & McElroy, 2000).
The Kick-Start Technique
Figure 1. Omega OSB11 Starting Block.
After the 2008 Beijing Olympics, a new start block (see: Figure 1) was introduced to
all international competition (Honda et al., 2010). Despite research on the new start
technique being scarce, studies that have compared start styles to the kick start
have suggested the use of the new technique is advantageous (Barlow et al., 2014;
Biel et al., 2010; Honda et al., 2010; Nomura et al., 2010; Takeda et al., 2013) This
advantage is due to Omega's claiming that the kick plate enables the swimmer to
push-off with a rear knee angle of 90°, which allows for optimal force production. As
a result of the perceived benefits, this start is now used by most swimmers during
competition.
11
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
The start position configuration of the kick start has also been studied. Honda et al.
(2012) investigated block position by testing kick-plate position and changing the
position of the swimmers' weight prior to leaving the block. In testing the theory
on elite swimmers, it was found that a neutral-weighted to slightly rear-weighted
kick start on the swimmers' preferred kick plate setting was the best combination
to produce the best dive performance (Honda et al., 2012). However, as swimmers
were asked to perform an unpreferred technique, results may have been skewed
in favor of the swimmers' preferred technique. Consequently, future start studies
should take into account the swimmers' preferred technique.
Comparisons between kick-start and track-start performance has also been
previously examined. Murrell and Dragunas (2013) compared the kick-start technique
to the grab start and found that the newer start was faster to 2 m on all occasions.
This study contained low subject (n = 4) numbers, did not allow swimmers to place
the kick plate at their desired positions and only used time to 2 m not time to 15 m
(the normal criterion for start performance). Similarly, Honda et al. (2010) found
that the kick start was faster than the track start to 5 and 7.5 m. This was due to a
faster block time and greater horizontal impulse. However, this study assessed dive
performance using a dive and glide technique to eliminate the influence of other
underwater variables, potentially changing the results when full dive performance to
15 m was assessed. While a number of different study designs were used to
investigate the kick start, it is clear that the kick start is advantageous to overall start
performance if used correctly.
Phases of the Swimming Start
The start phase can also be broken into three phases: on-block, flight, and underwater
(Cossor & Mason, 2001; Elipot et al., 2009; Hay, 1986; Thow et al., 2012). The
on-block phase is typically defined as the time between the starting signal and the
time when the swimmer's feet leave the blocks. The flight phase begins when the
feet leave the block and ends when the swimmer's head makes contact with the
water. Finally, the underwater phase is defined as the interval between the head's
contact with the water and the head resurfacing.
On-Block Phase
The on-block phase is the time from the starting signal to the moment when the
swimmer's toe leaves the block (Guimaraes & Hay, 1985; Issurin & Verbitsky,
2002; Ruschel et al., 2007). Total on-block time is a combination of reaction time
(the interval between the starting signal and the first movement on the block) and
movement time (Garcia-Hermoso et al., 2013). However, there has been some
evidence that this phase changes depending on the swimmer's specialty event.
Regardless of event, a faster block time has been shown to directly relate to
improvements in overall start performance (Garcia-Hermoso et al., 2013; Vantorre
12
CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
et al., 2010). Conversely, a reduction in block time may be linked to lower impulse
and thus lower resultant peak forces. A reduction in impulse would also result in a
lower take-off horizontal velocity and would significantly affect subsequent phases
of the start (Lyttle & Benjanuvatra, 2005). Slawson et al. (2013) also stated that a
shorter block time, higher take-off velocity, and greater distance of entry does not
equate to better start performanes on all occasions. For example, a greater take-off
horiztonal velocity may lead to a larger entry hole, resulting in increased drag. This
result suggests that during the on-block phase, there is a trade-off between time on
block and force produced (Breed & Young, 2003). By using the kick-start technique,
research has shown that swimmers are able to generate slightly shorter block times
without sacrificing take-off horizontal velocity (Honda et al., 2010; Slawson et al.,
2013). Honda et al. (2010) suggest this benefit is because the additional kick plate
allows the back leg to be in a more advantageous position for force production.
Furthermore, similar to Honda et al. (2010), Garcia-Hermoso et al. (2013) assessed a
large amount of elite competitive data to compare on-block times between the track
and kick starts. They found that there were shorter on-block times when using the
kick start, which was a determining factor, particularly in the women's 50 m events.
As such, using the kick-start technique would generally allow swimmers to gain an
added advantage for better start performances over other start techniques.
Flight Phase
The flight phase is typically defined as the time from when the swimmer's toe leaves
the block to when the swimmer's head enters the water. In theory, swimmers would
be able to travel faster through the air than through water due to less resistance.
However, flight duration is not usually correlated with start time; it is flight distance
that is a determining variable of performance (Ruschel et al., 2007). Hence, to
improve start performance, swimmers should theoretically maximize the flight phase
by increasing entry distance. On the other hand, research has shown that leaving
the block with higher horizontal velocity results in an increased entry distance, at the
cost of a larger entry hole size and a flatter trajectory (Costill et al., 1992; Kirner et
al., 1989). A flatter trajectory would also result in a shallower underwater trajectory,
leading to more drag acting to slow the swimmer down. Similar to the on-block
phase, there is a trade-off: the length of the flight phase is a compromise between
take-off horizontal velocity, take-off angle, and entry distance (Miller et al., 1984).
Underwater Phase
The underwater phase is typically defined as the time from when the swimmers'
head enters the water to when the swimmer resurfaces again to commence free
swimming. The underwater phase can be further subdivided into the glide phase
and the underwater kicking phase. During the glide phase, the swimmer is travelling
the fastest through the water and typically adopts a streamlined position with arms
outstretched. The underwater phase is crucial to overall race performance because,
after the dive itself, this is the next fastest section of the race (Connaboy et al.,
13
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
2010). This phase has also been identified as the most decisive in order to achieve
faster overall start performances (Cossor & Mason, 2001; Elipot et al., 2009; Thow
et al., 2012). The average speed during this phase is highly dependent on horizontal
velocity at penetration into the water and drag forces acting on the swimmer during
the glide phase (Lyttle & Benjanuvatra, 2005).
Correlation analysis of start performances at the Sydney 2000 Olympics by Cossor
and Mason (2001) found that underwater distance during the start was negatively
correlated to overall start performance for the men's 200 m butterfly, 100 m
backstroke, and 100 m freestyle races. This result would suggest that as the
swimmers swam longer underwater, start time to 15 m improved due to a greater
underwater velocity being maintained by these swimmers. The analysis of the
women's events was similar to the men's events; it showed that those swimmers
who travelled further underwater were able to achieve faster overall start times.
However, Cossor and Mason (2001) did not examine any extra factors such as
maximum depth or timing of first kick in their study.
Another study by Elipot et al. (2009) aimed to determine the swimmers' loss of
speed during the underwater phase of the start by estimating the distance
between the swimmer and the start wall as the swimmer's velocity decreased.
The influencing factors were then analyzed. Eight swimmers performed three grab
starts to the best of their ability. Nine anatomical landmarks were then identified to
allow the calculation of velocity curves. A principal components analysis was used
to determine the factors that most influenced glide performance. The results of
this analysis suggest that following a start entry, swimmers should maintain their
streamlined position until the center of mass reaches a mean distance of about 5.63
and 6.01 m (Elipot et al., 2009). If swimmers wait too long to start leg movements,
they would lose approximately 0.4 m/s. Conversely, if swimmers were to commence
their leg movements prematurely, they would cause higher hydrodynamic resistance
and lose speed. However, with the introduction of the new starting blocks, the grab
start (which was used by Elipot et al. (2009)) has been phased out in favor of a kick
start (Jorgic et al., 2010).
Similarly, Houel et al. (2012) conducted a detailed three-dimensional (3D) analysis of
the underwater phase. Focusing on the glide, this was the first study to provide such
detailed recommendations on strategies to improve the underwater phase of the
swimming start. The authors suggest that swimmers should apply three principles to
improving the glide phase of the swimming start: to remain as streamlined as possible,
to start underwater undulatory kicking after 6 m using only the feet and legs, and to
improve the kick frequency of underwater undulatory swimming. Nevertheless, this
study focused on the grab start, and it was unclear in the methodology how many
trials were conducted. Thus, these findings may not apply to the kick-start technique,
given the differences in take-off horizontal velocity and entry.
14
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
To enhance swimming start performance at the elite level, it is essential to first
investigate how elite swimmers start. A study by Tor et al. (2014a) employed a
large sample of elite Australian Olympic and World Championship representatives
to determine the characteristics of the kick-start technique. A number of different
parameters were shown to contribute to good start performances and were split
into above-water (parameters that occurred before the swimmer entered the water)
and underwater (parameters that occurred after the swimmer entered the water)
groupings. Table 1 displays a full summary of descriptive statistics of the parameters
examined in this study.
Table 1. Full descriptive statistic summary (adapted from: Tor et al., 2014a).
Parameter
Block time (s)
Mean and SD
0.74 ± 0.05
Take-off horizontal velocity (m/s)
4.62 ± 0.31
Take-off vertical velocity (m/s)
-1.25 ± 0.42
Time in the air (s)
0.29 ± 0.05
Average acceleration (m/s²)
6.26 ± 0.74
CoG angle of entry (degrees)
47.0 ± 2.2
Dive angle (degrees)
-15.14 ± 4.93
Entry distance (m)
2.82 ± 0.02
Entry hole diameter (m)
0.65 ± 0.02
Entry velocity (m/s)
6.79 ± 0.22
Head entry time (s)
1.04 ± 0.05
Peak footplate force (N)
1.55 ± 0.28
Peak grab force (N)
0.88 ± 0.22
Peak horizontal force (N)
1.24 ± 0.19
Peak vertical force (N)
1.29 ± 0.19
Peak power per kilogram (w/kg)
56.41 ± 10.36
Time of full submersion (s)
1.34 ± 0.05
Time after entry of first kick (s)
0.44 ± 0.22
15
CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
Parameter
Mean and SD
Time of first kick (s)
2.04 ± 0.24
Horizontal distance of max depth (m)
6.06 ± 0.97
Max depth of head (m)
-0.97 ± 0.23
Time at max depth (s)
1.94 ± 0.41
Time underwater in accent (s)
2.79 ± 0.73
Time underwater in descent (s)
0.90 ± 0.41
Total time underwater (s)
3.70 ± 0.97
Underwater velocity (m/s)
2.38 ± 0.21
Breakout distance (m)
11.50 ± 1.97
Time of surfacing (s)
4.73 ± 0.97
Time to 5 m (s)
1.56 ± 0.12
Avg. velocity 0-5 m (m/s)
3.22 ± 0.21
Time to 7.5 m (s)
2.58 ± 0.25
Avg. velocity 5-7.5 m (m/s)
2.49 ± 0.32
Time to 10 m (s)
3.87 ± 0.35
Avg. velocity 7.5 -10 m (m/s)
1.95 ± 0.17
Time to 15 m (s)
6.54 ± 0.53
Avg. velocity 10-15 m (m/s)
1.88 ± 0.14
16
CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
Components of the Swimming Start
The contributions of each sub-phase of the swimming start were examined in this
study and it was found that for elite athletes, 11% (0.74 s) was spent in the on-block
phase, 5% (0.30 s) in the flight phase, 56% (3.69 s) in the underwater phase, and
28% (1.81 s) free swimming (Tor et al., 2014a). The on-block and flight phase
contributions were the same as Blanksby et al. (2002) and Mason et al. (1997), who
examined the track-start. Furthermore, previous studies have not identified the exact
time contribution of the underwater phase to overall start performance. Hence, in
the study by Tor et al. (2014a) the time from head entry to 15 m was divided into
two sections: the underwater and free-swimming phases. The swimmers spent the
longest time in the underwater phase compared to the other sections of the start,
which highlights the underwater phase's importance to overall start performance.
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
Male vs Female
While there are obvious performance differences between male and female
swimmers, the research is limited in particular to using the kick-start technique (Tor
et al., 2014a). When comparing the contributions of each sub-phase, males spent
12% (0.72 s) in the on-block phase, 5% (0.29 s) in the flight phase, 61% (3.72 s)
in the underwater phase and 23% (1.39 s) free swimming. For females, 11%
(0.77 s) was spent in the on-block phase, 4.1% (0.29 s) in the flight phase, 51.9%
(3.67 s) in the underwater phase and 33.1% (2.34 s) free swimming. There were
also significant differences for specific parameters between male and female. Males
produced significantly larger horizontal take-off velocity (0.52 m/s-1, p < 0.001,
Large), peak horizontal force (0.22 Body Weight, p < 0.001, Large) and were also
able to produce faster underwater velocities than females for all segments. Males
also travelled significantly deeper (0.20 m, p < 0.001, Large) than females. For the
underwater parameters, there were significant differences in all average velocities
and split times, horizontal distance of max depth of head (0.08m, p = 0.08,
Large), underwater velocity (0.27 m/s, p < 0.001, Large) and breakout distance
(1.33 m, p = 0.02, Small). These differences resulted in males being on average
0.95 seconds faster than females to 15 m. The results showed that there are clear
variances in start performance between male and female athletes: Males are better
able to generate greater force and velocity in the early phases of the start, which
translates into faster overall start performances.
Freestyle vs Butterfly
The same study by Tor et al. (2014a) was one of the first to compare the differences
between freestyle and butterfly for the kick-start technique. There were no
significant differences in the above-water parameters between the two strokes. The
differences existed in the underwater phase: Butterfly swimmers had a significantly
deeper max depth (0.21 m, p = 0.01, Large) that was further away from the start
blocks (0.82 m, p < 0.01, Large), spent more time underwater (1.10 s, p < 0.00,
Large), had a higher underwater velocity (0.12 m/s, p = 0.02, Medium), and a longer
breakout distance (2.24 m, p < 0.00, Large) than the freestyle swimmers. Even
though butterfly swimmers spent longer and travelled faster underwater, there were
no significant differences in overall start performances or split times. This finding
would suggest that freestyle swimmers commence free swimming earlier and are
able to compensate for a slower underwater velocity with higher free-swimming
velocity than butterfly swimmers.
Key Parameters of the Swimming Start
It is important for sport scientists and coaches to understand the key parameters
of start performance in order to enhance it. In a study by Tor et al. (2015c), take-
17
CONTEMPORARY SWIM START RESEARCH
off horizontal velocity was identified as the most important parameter during the
above-water phase. An increase in take-off horizontal velocity would typically result
in the swimmer entering the water at a flatter angle. Hence, the effect of increasing
this parameter can be negated if the swimmer does not maintain velocity during the
underwater phase, due to an increased amount of resistance acting on him or her.
This finding further highlights the importance of identifying the ideal underwater
trajectory to reduce the amount of deceleration that occurs during the underwater
phase following entry into the water. Additionally, the key criteria of the underwater
phase for start performance were time underwater in descent, time underwater in
ascent, and time to 10 m. Extra specific statistical analysis also revealed that time
of maximum depth, time of first kick, and horizontal distance of maximum depth
would significantly affect the underwater phase. These parameters, along with
time underwater in descent, time underwater in ascent, and time to 10 m, would
affect the trajectory adopted by the swimmer. Therefore, developing greater take-
off horizontal velocity and focusing on the underwater phase by finding the ideal
trajectory would lead to improved start performance.
It has already been identified that the trajectory used by the swimmer during the
underwater phase would have implications on the amount of drag acting on the
swimmer and in turn the velocity achieved (Houel et al., 2012). To some extent,
the right combination of these variables is individual; however, there is still value
in identifying the main criteria that would contribute to start performance using
elite swimmers. These main parameters, identified using a large population of elite
swimmers, would provide coaches and sport scientists with a guide to improving
start performances in the future.
18
Three Common Underwater Trajectories
After having identified the importance of the underwater phase, particularly the
underwater trajectory, Tor et al. (2015a) aimed to compare underwater trajectories
using the kick-start technique with an elite population. In this study, swimmers were
asked to perform a series of freestyle dives at three depths. The depths were
categorized as Dive 1, Dive 2, and Dive 3. Dive 1 was typically characterized by
swimmers resurfacing as fast as possible with minimal underwater kick. During
Dive 1, the swimmers were asked to resurface and commence free swimming almost
immediately after entry. Dive 2 was a gradual descent followed by a gradual ascent.
For this dive, the swimmers were asked to dive deeper and aim to resurface around
the 10 m mark. Finally, during Dive 3 the swimmers were asked to dive down deep
and resurface to commence free swimming at the 15 m mark. Each dive trial was
tested using the Wetplate Analysis System. The Wetplate Analysis System is a
proprietary system developed by the AIS Aquatic Testing, Training, and Research
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
Unit (ATTRU). It consists of an instrumented starting block with the same dimensions
as the Omega OSB11 starting block (that is used at all major international
competitions), and a series of high-speed cameras (Mason et al., 2012; Tor et al.,
2015d).
It was found that the fastest trajectory is a trade-off between the time spent
underwater and the maintenance of velocity generated during the first two phases
of the start. There were no significant differences between dive conditions for
average velocity during the 7.5–10m segment; however, there were differences in
the segment before (5–7.5 m) and after (10–15 m). Dive 1 would have been fully
surfaced and free swimming during this segment, while Dive 2 and Dive 3 would
have been in the underwater phase, but presumably at different depths. It is likely
that Dive 2 and Dive 3 would experience a larger deceleration during this segment
than Dive 1 due to the increase in resistance just below the surface of the water
and greater propulsion created through free swimming. Consequently, the higher
velocities achieved in the 5–7.5 m segment by Dives 2 and 3 are nullified during the
7.5-10 m segment due to Dive 1 free swimming while Dive 2 and Dive 3 were still
underwater. Consequently, the velocity achieved by the swimmer during the start
phase is not purely a result of the underwater phase; there are other parameters such
as free swimming velocity that would affect start performance. Overall, the trajectory
used in Dive 2 had the fastest time to 15 m, although this result was not significantly
different from the trajectory used in Dive 3. While the differences between each
dive condition were small, these changes are significant when working with an
elite population and can practically contribute to improving start performance. For
19
CHAPTER 1: THE IMPORTANCE OF THE UNDERWATER PHASE
example, the top three finishers in the Men's 100m Freestyle at the 2007 FINA World
Swimming Championships were separated by only 0.04s (Hardt et al., 2009). Since
these margins can be so small, any advantage in reducing race time is important to
athletes, coaches, and sport scientists.
One key practical application from this study involves the selection of underwater
trajectories: coaches and swimmers must select a trajectory that is deep enough
to reduce the effect of drag while still not so deep as to require excessive amounts
of vertical travel and hence greater resultant distance. By adopting the correct
underwater trajectory, the swimmer is able to maintain a higher velocity for longer
during the underwater phase. Thus, swimmers should hold their glides for longer
and commence their first kicks later in the underwater phase. Specifically, it is
recommended that swimmers should commence the undulatory kick at approximately
6.6 m and achieve a maximum depth of approximately -0.92 m to minimize the
velocity lost during the underwater phase. This distance was the average used
during Dive 2 and therefore may be used as an early estimate. Commencing free-
swimming before this point would result in increased hydrodynamic resistance and
reduced velocity. These results are in evidence during Dive 1, where swimmers
commenced their first kick earlier.
20
How Does Drag Affect the Underwater Phase of the
Swimming Start?
During the underwater phase of the swimming start, drag is the largest resistance
acting in the opposite direction to slow the swimmer down. Hence, swimmers need
to adopt strategies to reduce this resistance. In short, there are three main types of
drag that will act on the swimmer during the underwater phase of the swimming
start: friction (or skin), form, and wave drag (Lyttle et al., 1998; Naemi et al., 2010;
Naemi & Sanders, 2008; Sheehan & Laughrin, 1992; Vennell et al., 2006). Frictional
drag represents the resistance produced from friction between the water and the
surface of the swimmer (Lyttle et al., 1998). Form drag is the result of the differences
between pressure at the leading and trailing edges of the body; boundary layer
separation from the swimmer is the principal contributor (Naemi et al., 201