Handbook of
Sports Medicine
and Science
Swimming
Second edition
CITIUS ALTIUS FORTIUS
An IOC
Medical Commission
Publication
Fina
FEDERATION INTERNATIONALE
DE NATATION
Blackwell
Publishing
EDITED BY
Joel M. Stager
David A. Tanner
00
4
4
Handbook of Sports Medicine and Science
Swimming
http://avaxho.me/blogs/ChrisRedfield
IOC Medical Commission
Sub-Commission on Publications
in the Sport Sciences
Howard G. Knuttgen PhD (Co-ordinator)
Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Harm Kuipers MD, PhD
Maastricht, The Netherlands
Per A.F.H. Renström MD, PhD
Stockholm, Sweden
Handbook of Sports Medicine
and Science
Swimming
EDITED BY
Joel M. Stager PhD
and
David A. Tanner PhD
Department of Kinesiology
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN
USA
Second Edition
Blackwell
Science
1991 Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd
2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
a Blackwell Publishing Company
Blackwell Science, Inc., 350 Main Street, Malden, Massachusetts 02148-5020, USA
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Blackwell Science Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
The right of the Authors to be identified as the Authors of this Work has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior
permission of the publisher.
First published 1991
Second edition 2005
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Swimming/ edited by Joel M. Stager and David A. Tanner.-2nd ed.
p. cm. (Handbook of sports medicine and science)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-632-05914-1
1. Swimming-Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Stager, Joel McCormick. II. Tanner, David A. III. Series.
RC1220.S8S937 2004
613.7′16-dc22
ISBN 0-632-05914-1
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Set in 8.75/12pt Stone Serif by TechBooks, New Delhi, India
Printed and bound in India by Replika Press Pvt. Ltd
Commissioning Editor: Andrew Robinson
Production Editor: Nick Morgan
Production Controller: Kate Charman
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com
2004008705
The publisher's policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry policy, and which has been
manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the publisher ensures
that the text paper and cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
Contents
List of contributors, vi
Foreword by the IOC, vii
Foreword by FINA, viii
Preface, ix
1 Energy systems, 1
Joel M. Stager and Michael A. Coyle
2 Central adaptations: heart, blood,
and lung, 20
Joel M. Stager
3 Peripheral adaptations: the skeletal
muscles, 35
Joel M. Stager
4 The mechanics of swimming, 51
Barry S. Bixler
5 Resistance and propulsion, 59
Barry S. Bixler
6 Psychology, 102
John S. Raglin and Brendon S. Hale
7 Medical issues related to swimming, 115
David F. Gerrard
8 Training and testing of competitive
swimmers, 128
David B. Pyne and Wayne M. Goldsmith
Index, 145
V
List of Contributors
Barry S. Bixler
Principal Engineer, Honeywell Engines and Systems,
3145 W. Tyson Place, Chandler, AZ 85226, USA
Michael A. Coyle PhD
Vice President, Clinical Development, Pharmaceutical
Division, VivoMetrics, 100 Overlook Center, Princeton,
NJ 08540, USA
David F. Gerrard MD
Associate Professor, Academic Convenor-Sports
Medicine, and Associate Dean-Student Affairs,
University of Otago, Dunedin School of Medicine,
PO Box 913, Dunedin, New Zealand
Wayne M. Goldsmith
Moregold Sports Pty. Ltd, PO Box 112, Charnwood,
ACT 2615, Australia
Brendon S. Hale MS
Department of Kinesiology, Indiana University, 1025 E.
7th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405-7109, USA
David B. Pyne PhD
Physiologist, Department of Physiology, Australian
Institute of Sport, PO Box 176, Belconnen, ACT 2616,
Australia
John S. Raglin PhD
Department of Kinesiology, Indiana University, 1025 E.
7th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405-7109, USA
Joel M. Stager PhD
Department of Kinesiology, Indiana University, 1025 E.
7th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405-7109, USA
David A. Tanner PhD
Department of Kinesiology, Indiana University, 1025 E.
7th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405-7109, USA
vi
Foreword by the IOC
The athlete's health has always been a priority for the
International Olympic Committee. I therefore wel-
come the initiative by the IOC Medical Commission,
with Blackwell Publishing, to republish, after 12 years,
the Swimming handbook.
An Olympic sport since the first Games of the
modern era in 1896, swimming has always aroused
great interest among both the public and the medical-
scientific community.
Through the diversity of its disciplines, and espe-
cially because it is practised in an unnatural environ-
ment for man, swimming has always been the subject
of a great deal of sports-medicine research. This re-
search, both biomechanical and biophysiological, has
brought about an improvement in athletes' condi-
tions and training equipment and, consequently, their
performances.
I am convinced that this book will be a useful refer-
ence tool for sports doctors as well as the medical and
paramedical entourage of any athlete. Let us thank the
authors for this!
Jacques Rogge
IOC President
vii
Foreword by FINA
On behalf of the Fédération Internationale de Nata-
tion (FINA), it is my pleasure to introduce you to
the second edition of Swimming, an IOC Handbook
of Sports Medicine and Science, which is mainly de-
voted to the physical, biomechanical, psychological;
medical and training problems in competitive swim-
ming. As world governing body for the disciplines of
swimming, diving, water polo, synchronised swim-
ming and open water swimming, FINA is obviously in-
terested in the widest possible transmission of knowl-
edge to our athletes, coaches, physicians and officials
involved in our sport.
As one of FINA's goals is to disseminate and accel-
erate the participation of young competitors in our
disciplines, it is of relevant importance to detect, cor-
rect and prevent the health or injury problems that are
inevitably associated with the practice of any physical
activity. The engagement in this area led to the cre-
ation of a FINA World Sports Medicine Congress, held ev-
ery two years, and to which are invited scientific and
clinical experts with an interest in the field of medicine
applied to aquatic sports.
We are also proud of counting with the FINA Sports
Medicine Committee that has the duty of providing
medical and sport science expertise and gives recom-
mendations regarding health conditions in the prac-
tice of our sports. The professors, doctors and other
specialists of this Committee are continuously search-
ing for new ideas and suggestions on how to improve
and develop the medical aspects of our aquatic disci-
plines.
This Handbook, edited by the IOC, is a precious tool
to help our members in the prosecution of their activ-
ities, as our main goal is to be useful to the aquatic
community formed by our 187 Member National Fed-
erations. That is why I especially salute the editors and
contributors who devoted their time and effort to the
elaboration of this publication.
Mustapha Larfaoui
FINA President
viil
Preface
At a recent coaching convention, one of the keynote
speakers concluded that nothing particularly inno-
vative has happened within competitive swimming
in the last 25 years. The speaker presented evidence
that illustrated his point and cited swim goggles, lane
lines, interval training, touch pads, pace clocks, and
age group swimming as important innovations that
acted to transform competitive swimming in the 1950s
through the 1970s. It is our hope that while this argu-
ment might be seen by some to be valid, the topics
presented within this handbook will be cause for this
conclusion to be challenged.
The truth is that the world of competitive sports is
far from static and is constantly changing. It should be
obvious that significant change has resulted from re-
cent advances in science and technology. The history
of our sport over the course of the past 100 years of or-
ganized competitive swimming is essentially a descrip-
tion of the athletes, their coaches, and their collective
accomplishments. In the next decade, however, the
history of swimming will be defined by advances in
technology, spearheaded by scientific innovators.
In the past year, the world lost two men devoted
to innovation and science in swimming. Allen B.
Richardson, MD, coauthor of the first edition of this
handbook, passed away in September 2003. Then in
January 2004 we lost our mentor and friend, James E.
(Doc) Counsilman. Both men were committed to im-
proving performance and prolonging the "competi-
tive lives" of swimmers by adapting knowledge from
far-ranging fields into the daily routines of swim-
mers. We, therefore, respectfully dedicate this book to
them.
Our association with Doc Counsilman goes back
over 35 years and we both admit to have been greatly
influenced by his lifelong passion for swimming. Doc
often lectured about the "Three C's of Learning: Cu-
riosity, Confusion, and Comprehension." Learning
begins with curiosity as to why we do something or
how this or that works. Confusion follows when things
don't make sense or the rationale behind a practice is
found faulty. Comprehension results from repeated
observations and the testing of hypotheses. Over the
course of time, by asking questions and challenging
the status quo, advances in knowledge are attained. To
paraphrase from Robert Persig, "Scientific truth is not
dogma, good for eternity, but a temporal quantitative
entity... the time spans of scientific truths are an in-
verse function of the intensity of scientific effort. The
more you look, the more you see." Doc Counsilman
was most proud of his ability to question, see, and then
implement new things that would directly affect how
fast swimmers swim.
This is an "up-front" acknowledgment that the
Handbook of Swimming is not intended for the begin-
ner swimmer. Rather, it is for the serious student of
the sport, one with the curiosity and the motivation to
delve into the fine details. Some of this material is very
complicated, especially the two chapters pertaining to
the biomechanics of swimming. Ones first impression
might be that the average swim coach does not need to
know about symmorphosis or the hydrodynamics of
swimming, but the controversy surroundingadvances
in medicine and the new technologies require that we
learn more about fundamental physics and physiol-
ogy in order to play an active role. It is likely that these
ix
x Preface
chapters will lead to confusion for many of us, but
with further study, as Doc suggested, comprehension
can be achieved.
We would like to recognize the coauthors of the first
edition of this handbook for their fine work: David
L. Costill, Ernest W. Maglischo, and the late Allen
B. Richardson. We thank the contributing authors
of this edition: Barry Bixler, Michael Coyle, Wayne
Goldsmith, Brendon Hale, David Gerrard, David Pyne,
and Jack Raglin. We commend Nick Morgan of Black-
well Publishing for his patience with us and espe-
cially thank Howard G. Knuttgen for coordinating the
Handbook of Sports Medicine and Science series.
Joel M. Stager, PhD
David A. Tanner, PhD
Chapter 1
Energy systems
Joel M. Stager and Michael A. Coyle
Introduction
Human performance begins at the cellular level, thus
the discussion pertaining to the physiology of swim
performance must begin there as well. Ultimately, as
a swimmer's cells go, so goes the rest of the body. An
architect knows that when the bricks of a wall begin to
crumble, the building will eventually fall! So too, when
the metabolic processes of the cells fail, the swimmer
can no longer perform.
The concepts that govern cells and their viability are
the same as those that govern the body, its tissues, and
organ systems. Tissues are collections of different cell
types while organs consist of different tissue types. Or-
gans make up systems and systems make up the body,
ultimately constituting a competitive swimmer. How
a swimmer adapts to a training regime and the causes
of a swimmer's fatigue are determined at the level of
the cell; therefore, swim performance is conferred up-
wards to the complexity level of the entire athlete. The
muscle cells are the star performers and the cardiopul-
monary, gastrointestinal, renal, and CNS represent the
supporting cast.
Regardless of the nature of the response or specific
task performed, all physiological work done by a mus-
cle cell requires energy. Although the various cells and
cell types of the body are specialized to perform dif-
ferent physiological functions, regardless of the type
of work performed, cell metabolism must increase to
meet energy needs or work cannot continue. The first
point of discussion concerning swim performance
and fatigue then is how cells (in particular the muscle
cells) supply the energy to do physiological and physi-
cal work. Once a basis for understanding is developed,
this information can provide a better platform upon
which a rational training plan can be built.
Energy for exercise
The ability to increase the mechanical work done by
the swimmer is ultimately determined by the ability
of the muscle cells to provide the energy to do the work.
Whole body metabolic rate can increase more than 40-
fold in well-conditioned athletes, with the increased
rate of metabolism of the various active tissues (skele-
tal muscles) being nearly 100 times their metabolic
rate at rest. The increase in energy demand is supplied
by accelerating the output of several metabolic path-
ways. The metabolic pathways that provide energy
can be separated into those that do not require oxy-
gen, the immediately available phosphogens and gly-
colysis, and the single metabolic pathway that does,
the Krebs or tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (Fig. 1.1).
The maximum energy outputs of these three pathways
will determine the ultimate performance in swim-
ming events ranging from 50 to 1500 m and beyond.
At rest, a swimmer's oxygen consumption is appro-
ximately one third of a liter per minute. The oxygen
consumption of mature, elite, well-trained swimmers
can exceed 6 1-min-¹ during near maximal swim-
ming. Estimates of the increase in nonoxidative en-
ergy production during swimming are more difficult
to make and impossible to measure. Estimates suggest,
1
2 Chapter 1
Carbohydrates
Muscle cell
2 ATP
Glycolysis
CP
ADP + Pi
1
ATP
2
2 ATP
Lactic acid ←←
Mitochondrion
CO2
-2 ATP
Pyruvate
CO2
Acetyl CoA
TCA
cycle
3
CO2
Fatty acids
Amino acids
deamination
Beta
oxidation
NADH + H+
FADH2
02
ETC
ATP + H₂O
however, that a power output that is equal to twice
that of the aerobic capacity may be attained by swim-
mers during "all-out" sprints.
From the perspective of a typical swimming event,
two issues are evident. First, although nonoxygen con-
suming pathways are considered less efficient, they
must provide the energy at the beginning of exercise
because oxidative (aerobic) metabolism requires sev-
eral minutes to fully accelerate. There is no way for the
cells to anticipate the metabolic power output prior
to a muscular contraction. For a short period of time
then, at the beginning of a swim bout, there is a deficit
between the energy required to do work and the ox-
idative means to supply it (Fig. 1.2).
Second, energy requirements beyond those which
can be provided by aerobic metabolism must come
from more than one metabolic pathway. The instan-
taneous power output that many muscles are capa-
ble of performing is greater than that which can be
supported by aerobic metabolism. Therefore, at high
exercise intensities multiple pathways are engaged to
provide the necessary energy to do work. As is ex-
plained later, the greater the nonoxidative energy con-
tribution, the shorter the time this high power output
can be sustained.
Source of energy for exercise
Ultimately, the energy to do cellular work is derived
from chemical bonds and is contained within the
compound adenosine triphosphate (ATP). ATP is pro-
duced within each cell from intracellular as well as
extracellular substrates. The maximal ATP production
of the cell is related to the concentration of reactants,
cofactors, and the concentration and characteristics
of the various enzymatic pathways.
Under certain circumstances the ability of the cells
to produce ATP may be limited by the availability of the
Fig. 1.1 Overview of the three
energy systems: (1) Immediate,
(2) glycolysis, and (3) aerobic. The
immediate ATP-CP system takes
place in the cytosol of the cell and
produces one ATP for each creatine
phosphate (CP). Glycolysis
metabolizes glucose in the cytosol,
producing a net of 2 ATP and either
pyruvate or lactic acid. Pyruvate
enters the mitochondria and goes
through the TCA cycle. Oxygen (O2)
accepts the hydrogen ions produced
by glycolysis and the TCA cycle to
result in ATP and water. Fatty acids
go through beta oxidation before
entering the TCA cycle. Amino acids
are deaminated before entering the
TCA cycle. The aerobic system
produces a net of 36-38 ATP from
glucose and 129 from the fatty acid
palmitate. ETC: electron transport
chain.
necessary fuel substrates and reactants. At high work
intensities, however, most of the fuel for metabolism is
from intracellular sources. Delivery of metabolic sub-
strates to the cell is a potential limiting factor only at
less intense, more prolonged efforts. It appears, how-
ever, that during heavy exercise, the ability of the car-
diovascular system to act in this delivery capacity may
be the limiting factor in aerobic metabolism. Specif-
ically, oxygen transport, (rather than metabolic sub-
strate transport) appears to limit aerobic metabolism.
Rather than the ability of the peripheral tissues to
utilize oxygen, the evidence suggests that for most
athletes it is the ability of the transport system to
provide O2 that may limit aerobic metabolism.
The substrates for energy metabolism include car-
bohydrates, fats, and proteins. Fats and carbohydrates
may be stored locally within the muscle cells or else-
where in specific storage tissues, such as adipose tissues
and the liver. Proteins are generally not considered to
be "stored" anywhere to any significant extent. They
exist as components of the tissues, as circulating enti-
ties in the blood, and as compounds absorbed during
digestion from the gut, following a meal (Fig. 1.3).
Necessary reactants with all of these substrates dur-
ing metabolism include oxygen and certain vitamins
Energy systems 3
Oxygen uptake
Energy requirement
Glucose
▲ Free fatty acid
* Amino acid
Adipose
cell
GI
tract
1
2
3
Time (min)
Δ
Fig. 1.2 Oxygen uptake as a function of time during
intense exercise. During the initial seconds of intense
exercise, the difference between the energy required to
swim and the energy supplied aerobically is the oxygen
deficit.
Liver
*
*
Δ
Π
Vein
*
A
Lung
02
CO₂
O2
CO₂
Π
Heart
Capillaries
CO₂
Artery
*
Glucose
Glycogen
Amino
acid
Box
TCA
ETC
Mitochondrion
Muscle cell
Fat
ATP
H₂O
Fig. 1.3 Model of the respiratory system, including the
pathways for oxygen (O2), carbon dioxide (CO2), and
substrates. Carbohydrates, proteins, and fats enter the
blood from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Glucose and free
fatty acids are transported in and out of the liver. The
heart pumps blood throughout the body. Oxygen enters
the blood and CO2 leaves the lung. The substrates enter
the muscle cell to be metabolized, producing CO2, water,
and ATP. ETC: electron transport chain.
and minerals that act as coreactants. The important
point, however, is that while certain substrates that
the body processes into usable energy forms may
be stored, ATP itself isn't stored to any great extent.
Cells utilize an "on demand" energy system cued by
4 Chapter 1
the ratio of substrates to products within the various
metabolic pathways. In other words, the ATP neces-
sary for cellular work is generated when, and only when,
there is a demand for it. The demand is signaled by the
presence of the ATP breakdown products adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate
(AMP) and by the ratio of ATP to ADP.
Metabolic feed-forward "turbocharger" mechanism
In some ways this "on demand system" is analogous to a tur-
bocharger unit popular on the engines of high-performance au-
tomobiles. A "turbo" unit supplies extra air to the engine when
demanded by the driver by putting his or her foot to the floor. The
compressed air provided by the turbo unit delivers more oxygen
to the engine and therefore allows greater fuel combustion for
increased power. However, because the turbocharger is spun by
the engine's exhaust gases, there must be an increased engine
output (more exhaust) before there can be an increased input
(more oxygen) from the turbo unit. Some work must be done be-
fore increased input can be achieved. Figure 1.4 represents the
feed-forward "turbocharger" mechanism of the muscle cell. Aero-
bic metabolism and glycolysis are fueled by metabolic exhaust in
the form of ADP. In order to get the metabolic machinery revved
up, some ADP must be created, and the faster ADP is produced,
the faster metabolism will attempt to meet the energy needs of
the cell.
Metabolic substrates:
the phosphogens
Within the cell, prior to the energetic need, there is
no way to anticipate the ATP required for subsequent
physiological work. There must be a rapidly respond-
ing energy production system that reacts quickly to
the demand placed upon the cell as a result of work
done. The increased energy usage sets into motion in-
creased energy production. Increased cellular exhaust,
if you will, signals an increased flux of substrates into
the various pathways and energy generation is acceler-
ated to meet the increased need. This initial burst of en-
ergy is provided by immediate energy sources within
the cells: ATP and creatine phosphate (CP).
Muscle cell
ATP
CP
ADP
Pi
Cr
ATP
CP
CP
ATP
ADP
ATP
"METABOLIC
EXHAUST"
ADP
Cr
Pi
....
CP
ATP
Glycolysis
ADPATP
Aerobic
ADP
ATP
ATP
CP
Fig. 1.4 The "turbocharger" model
of metabolism. The production of
ADP, inorganic phosphate (P₁), and
creatine in the muscle cell "primes"
the left side of the turbocharger unit,
driving the regeneration of ATP and
CP via glycolysis and aerobic
metabolism.
ATP
So, unlike in a factory where vast stockpiles of raw re-
sources and spare parts are compiled for later use, there
is not much room within most cells for maintaining
an "energy inventory." This is particularly true for the
skeletal muscle cells. Maximal sustained rates of work
are not a function of immediately available "stored
energy." The limiting factor to extended submaximal
performance is the rate at which the raw substrates can
be delivered and or converted to usable energy sources.
Thus it is that ATP exists in the body in limited quan-
tities, i.e., there are no vast stockpiles of ATP within
the cell or within the body as there is no place to store
it. Biochemists estimate that only about 100 g of ATP
can be purified from the human body. Roughly half
this ATP exists within the skeletal muscles. In contrast,
the amount of ATP required to do all of the necessary
physiological work done on a daily basis for an average
human being is estimated to be approximately equal to
body weight (about 70 kg)! Interestingly, this is also ap-
proximately the amount of additional ATP required to
run a marathon or complete a typical two-a-day swim
workout.
The breakdown of ATP to ADP and inorganic phos-
phate (Pi) is enough to provide the initial impulse
that signals the acceleration of energy consumption
and therefore energy production. But, the immedi-
ately available energy sources are barely enough "fuel"
to produce a few seconds of intensive effort, although
the power output is very high compared to glycolysis
and the aerobic pathways. Immediate energy sources
can generate power at a rate more than three times that
of the TCA cycle and more that twice that of glycolysis.
Creatine phosphate
Creatine phosphate is the other readily available phos-
phogen and also exists in limited concentrations. Es-
timates suggest that only about 120 g of CP exist in
the body, with most of this found within the muscles
(4 g·kg-1). However, it is important to reiterate that
sustained exercise is rarely limited by the immediate
availability of ATP or CP, rather, it is the ability to re-
generate ATP rapidly which usually sets a limit to pro-
longed muscular work.
To return to our internal combustion engine model
for a moment, everyone can understand that the max-
imum speed of a car is not a function of how large the
Energy systems 5
gas tank is. It is also true that automotive speed is only
partially related to how large the engine displacement
is. Semitrucks, for instance, have very large engines but
are not necessarily the fastest vehicles on the road. The
really high-performance engines depend upon how
fast the crankshaft spins (how many revolutions per
minute, rpm) and on the engine displacement (piston
travel and cylinder volume) to make the car go really
fast. Cells that do lots of physiological work have the
metabolic machinery that allows recycling of ADP to
ATP very rapidly. For a swimmer to swim fast then, it
is only partially a function of having a lot of ATP in
a large fuel tank. Sprinters, more so than endurance
swimmers, rely on the large fuel tank (immediately
available phosphogens) to be successful. Endurance
swimmers have the ability to convert substrates into
energy very quickly. It is this turnover rate, the rate at
which ATP can be recycled from ADP or CP, that largely
influences mid- to long-distance swim performances.
One important conclusion from this knowledge is
that it is virtually worthless to ingest ATP as a means
to improve performance. Various supplement prod-
ucts that include ATP in their composition are com-
mercially available. It is unlikely that these supple-
ments are effective given that the ingested ATP would
have to be (1) absorbed by the gut, (2) left undigested
by stomach acids and enzymes, (3) transported to
the metabolically active site via the vascular system,
(4) diffused into the metabolically active site, and
(5) of enormous quantity. A few slurps of ATP from a
small plastic vial represent a very unlikely supplement
to a swimmer's premeet diet.
Metabolic substrates: carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins
It cannot be said that significant stockpiles of fuel
substrates from which energy can be metabolized to
form ATP do not exist. Adipose cells, which comprise
the fat pads of the body, serve as reservoirs of lipids.
Muscle cells have local extracellular fat deposits as
well as intracellular lipid reservoirs. Lipids, or rather
fatty acids, are available to the cells as particularly effi-
cient fuel substrates. Fat contains roughly twice the
energy density per gram of carbohydrates and pro-
teins. It is estimated that average sedentary female
may have stored lipids which when processed into
energy equivalents might be in excess of 200 000 cal,
6 Chapter 1
while the average man may carry the equivalent of
about 200 000 cal. Given that the average person requires
about 2000 cal a day to do the minimum cellular bio-
logical work, this stored fat can provide the energy for
nearly 100 days. But once again, having lots of fat does
not necessarily mean that the capacity to generate en-
ergy quickly is particularly great.
In contrast to fats, however, carbohydrates are not
stored in peripheral deposits within the body. There
are no sugar cubes or subcutaneous sugar crystals that
can be felt through the skin. Because carbohydrates
represent an important substrate during exercise, they
are perceived as limiting to prolonged performances
and extended swim practices. Studies suggest that the
carbohydrate stores within the active muscle can be
easily depleted within a typical swim workout and that
the ability to replenish these carbohydrate stores be-
tween workouts may be a critical factor in training well.
One of the effects of intensive physical swim train-
ing is to adapt the muscle cells to use more fat as a fuel
source. This occurs presumably as a means to spare the
cell's limited carbohydrate supplies. Because of their
importance in fueling exercise, carbohydrate intake
is an important parameter to monitor in swimmers
participating in multiple workout days and multiple
practice days per week. The importance of carbohy-
drate metabolism should be evident from the exten-
sive interest in the role of lactic acid formation during
and following swimming bouts. Lactic acid produc-
tion comes as a direct result of using carbohydrates as
a fuel source to generate energy during an intensive
swim effort.
The flip side of elite performance and its understand-
ing is an analysis of the factors that cause fatigue dur-
ing practice as well as during a competitive swim event.
While fatigue is multifactorial, one well-accepted, fun-
damental cause of fatigue is the inability to maintain
the energy requirements of the muscle. A detailed ex-
planation of carbohydrate metabolism via glycolysis
is appropriate, as is a closer look at what Brooks et al.
(1996) refer to as "the mythology of lactic acid."
Three metabolic pathways
There are three pathways for generating energy: the
ATP-CP system, glycolysis, and aerobic metabolism.
We also know that there are three substrates from
which cellular energy can be derived: carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins. Finally, we know that each path-
way has defined upper limits, or capacities, that are
"trainable" to different extents.
ATP-CP: the (nearly) immediately
available energy
At the onset of exercise, the first metabolic pathway
engaged provides energy derived from the available
intracellular ATP and CP within the muscle cell. This
pathway involves the phosphogens ATP and CP and a
single enzyme, creatine kinase, that catalyzes the re-
action between the two. A second pathway, referred to
as the myokinase system, generates ATP (and an AMP)
from two ADP molecules. It acts to buffer the fall in ATP
when energy needs are extreme. Beyond a description
of the intermediates and the energetic capacity of the
pathway, there isn't much more to be said about the
contribution of the immediately available phospho-
gens. Phosphogen levels increase little with training,
essentially in proportion to increases in muscle vol-
ume. Estimates of recovery time required for this path-
way, given a complete exhaustion of the high-energy
intermediates, range from nearly instantaneous to 30 s
or so.
Current debate surrounds the effectiveness of using
creatine and/or phosphate as a means to increase intra-
cellular concentrations prior to exercise. Recent data
are inconsistent concerning the ability to increase cre-
atine levels through dietary manipulation. Some re-
ports suggest that increased intake of creatine can en-
hance power output during short sprint performance
through perhaps the 200-m events. The data specifi-
cally concerning improvements in swim performance
due to creatine supplementation are difficult to inter-
pret as the research designs used in these studies are
easy to criticize.
Glycolysis
Glycolysis, the second pathway, metabolizes carbohy-
drates and involves a series of 12 enzymes and multi-
ple metabolic intermediates (Fig. 1.5). The pathway
breaks down glucose as the fuel substrate, requires
no oxygen, and ends with the production of ATP
and either pyruvate or lactic acid. During prolonged
exercise, glycolysis is limited by the availability of car-
bohydrates as a source of energy. The carbohydrate
Energy systems 7
Glucose
1
ATP
A
ADP
2
B
3
ATP
C
ADP
4
D
Intermediates
1 Glucose
2 Glucose 6-phosphate
3 Fructose 6-phosphate
4 Fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate
5 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
6 Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
7 1, 3-bisphosphoglycerate
8 3-phosphoglycerate
9 2-phosphoglycerate
10 Phosphoenolpyruvate
6
5
E
NAD+
F
11 Pyruvate
NADH + H+
Enzymes
(7
ADP
A Hexokinase
G
B Phosphoglucose isomerase
ATP
C Phosphofructokinase
8
D Aldolase
H
E Triose phosphate isomerase
9
F Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
1
NADH + H+
G Phosphoglycerate kinase
10
NAD+
H Phosphoglycerate mutase
ADP
I Enolase
J
ATP
K
J Pyruvate kinase
11
(12)
K Lactate dehydrogenase
2x Pyruvate 2x Lactic acid
Fig. 1.5 The 12 steps of glycolysis, with associated enzymes.
substrate is either stored within the muscle cell or
is transported to the cell through the blood supply.
Glucose can be considered a nonoxidative fuel source
if the end products are considered to be pyruvate or
lactate. Alternatively, glucose can be considered an
oxidative fuel source if pyruvate is further funneled
through the TCA cycle ending with the products CO2,
H2O, ATP, and heat.
During intensive exercise and immediately follow-
ing a meal high in carbohydrate, carbohydrates be-
come the cell's preferred fuel source. In the past,
glucose metabolism, or glycolysis, was commonly re-
ferred to as anaerobic metabolism because oxygen is
not directly involved in the process. Today, while still
widely used, the term anaerobic is considered by some
to be a misnomer, or at best, to be misleading. It has led
to the belief that glycolysis takes place in the muscles
only when there is a lack of oxygen. It is clear, however,
that when great amounts of energy are needed quickly,
glycolysis plays an important role in providing this en-
ergy. Oxygen availability has been determined to have
little to do with the metabolism of glucose or which
of the two partial end products, lactate or pyruvate, is
produced in greater abundance. It is even known, for
instance, that lactic acid is produced at rest, as well as
during light exercise, and that the extent to which it
accumulates in blood is complex.
Physiological systems tend to be conservative, thus
at rest, and several hours