TEA
ELLISEDUCATION
SERVICES
SUPERVISOR
GUARD
RNATIONAL
FEGUARD TRAINING
ELLIS & ASSOCIATES
INTERNATIONAL
LIFEGUARD
Training Program Manual
5th Edition
Meets ECC, MAHC, and OSHA Guidelines
Ellis & Associates, Inc.
5979 Vineland Rd. Suite 105
Orlando, FL 32819
www.jellis.com
800-742-8720
Copyright © 2020 by Ellis & Associates, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Unless otherwise indicated in writing by Ellis & Associates, the recipient of this manual is granted the limited
right to download, print, photocopy, and use the electronic materials to fulfill Ellis & Associates lifeguard courses,
subject to the following restrictions:
• The recipient is prohibited from downloading the materials for use on their own website.
• The recipient cannot sell electronic versions of the materials.
• The recipient cannot revise, alter, adapt, or modify the materials.
• The recipient cannot create derivative works incorporating, in part or in whole, any content of
the materials.
For permission requests, write to Ellis & Associates, addressed “Attention: Permissions Coordinator,” at the
address above.
Disclaimer:
The procedures and protocols presented in this manual and the course are based on the most current
recommendations of responsible medical sources, including the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation
(ILCOR) Consensus Guidelines for CPR, Emergency Cardiovascular Care (ECC) and First Aid, the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA) standards 1910.151, and the Model Aquatic Health Code (MAHC).
The materials have been reviewed by internal and external field experts and verified to be consistent with the most
current guidelines and standards. Ellis & Associates, however, make no guarantee as to, and assume no responsibility
for, the correctness, sufficiency, or completeness of such recommendations or information. Additional procedures
may be required under particular circumstances. Ellis & Associates disclaims all liability for damages of any kind
arising from the use of, reference to, reliance on, or performance based on such information.
ISBN 978-0-9961108-7-7
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Not Available at Time of Printing
Unless otherwise indicated on the Credits Page, all photographs and illustrations are copyright protected by
Ellis & Associates.
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
i
Welcome
ii
Continuing Education
iv
Part One: Professionalism and Safety
Chapter 1 Introduction to Lifeguarding
1
• Why Lifeguards?
2
• History of Lifeguarding
2
• Drowning: A Global Crisis
3
• Ellis and Associates Lifeguards
4
• Get the Most From Your E&A Lifeguard Training
5
• On-Going Training
7
• Primary Responsibilities of Lifeguards
8
• Secondary Responsibilities of Lifeguards
9
• Being Held Accountable
11
• Legal Concepts That Apply to Lifeguards
12
• Standard of Care
14
• Lifeguard Liability
14
• For Your Review
16
Chapter 2 Professional Image and Action
17
• Lifeguard Appearance and Behavior
18
• Lifeguard Uniform
20
• Lifeguard Equipment
20
• Positive Guest Interactions
23
• Rule Enforcement
24
• For Your Review
26
Chapter 3 Environmental Safety
27
• General Environmental Safety
28
• Weather Conditions
28
• Hydration
31
• Chemical Safety
31
• Recreational Waterborne Illnesses
33
• For Your Review
35
Chapter 4 Preventing Disease Transmission
36
• Bloodborne and Airborne Pathogens
37
• How Diseases are Transmitted
39
• OSHA Protection Standards
39
• Disease Prevention Practices
40
• If an Exposure Occurs
43
• For Your Review
45
Chapter 5 Guest Safety
46
• Health Codes, Laws and Standards
47
• Rule Enforcement
48
• Shallow Water Blackout
49
• Secondary Drowning
50
• Life Jackets
50
• For Your Review
52
Part Two: Vigilance and Teamwork
Chapter 6 Zone Protection
53
• The 10/20 Protection Standard
54
• Lifeguard Zones
54
• Zone Documentation and Training
56
• For Your Review
57
Chapter 7 Surveillance
58
• Introduction
59
• Recognizing a Guest in Distress
59
• Recognizing Risk Factors
60
• The Drowning Process
61
• Proactive Scanning Strategies
63
• For Your Review
66
Chapter 8 Maintaining Vigilance
67
• Vigilance
68
• Lifeguard Station Rotations
68
• Challenges to Vigilance
71
• Avoiding Distractions
73
• Improving Performance
74
• For Your Review
76
Chapter 9 The Emergency Action Plan (EAP)
77
• Emergency Action Plans
78
• Multiple Rescuer Facilities
79
• Single Rescuer Facilities
79
• Communication Devices and Standards
80
• Contacting EMS
85
• For Your Review
86
Part Three: Providing Quality Basic Life Support (BLS)
Chapter 10 Basic Life Support: Respiratory Emergencies
87
• The Respiratory System
88
• Causes of Respiratory Emergencies
88
• Respiratory Distress
89
• Respiratory Arrest
89
• Scene Survey
90
• Primary Check
90
• Secondary Check
91
• Rescue Breathing
91
• Special Situations
94
• Airway Obstruction (Choking)
95
• For Your Review
98
Chapter 11 Basic Life Support: Cardiac Emergencies
99
• The Circulatory System
100
• Cardiovascular Disease
100
• Cardiac Arrest
101
• Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
102
• Automated External Defibrillation (AED)
107
• For Your Review
112
Chapter 12 Supplemental Oxygen Support
114
• Drowning and the Need for Supplemental Oxygen
115
• Supplemental Oxygen Systems (SOS)
115
• Supplemental Oxygen Delivery Devices
117
• Care and Maintenance of Supplemental Oxygen Systems
121
• For Your Review
123
Part Four: First Responder Care
Chapter 13 Caring for Injuries
124
• Introduction
125
• Scene Safety
125
• Assessing Injured Guests
125
• Wounds
126
• External Bleeding
127
• Internal Bleeding
129
• Burns
130
• Head Injuries
132
• Spinal Injuries
137
• Pelvic and Hip Injuries
138
• Chest Injuries
138
• Abdomen Injuries
139
• Joint, Bone, and Muscle Injuries
140
• Shock
142
• Emergency Moves
143
• Triage
144
• For Your Review
145
Chapter 14 Caring for Sudden Illnesses
147
• Allergic Reactions
148
• Breathing Emergencies
151
• Cold Emergencies
152
• Diabetic Emergencies
153
• Drug Emergencies
154
• Fainting
157
• Heart Attack
158
• Heat Emergencies
158
• Poisoning
160
• Pregnancy Complications
167
• Seizure
167
• Stroke
168
• For Your Review
172
Part Five: Water Rescues
Chapter 15 Water Rescues for Responsive Guests
174
• Introduction
175
• Assists
175
• Water Entries
176
• Approach Strokes
177
• General Water Rescue Procedures
178
• Responsive Guests on the Surface
179
• Responsive Guests Beneath the Surface
181
• Challenging Rescue Situations
183
• For Your Review
185
Chapter 16 Water Rescues for Unresponsive Guests
186
• Unresponsive Guests in Distress
187
• Unresponsive Guest Rescues
187
• Caring for an Unresponsive Guest in the Water
191
• Rapid Extrication of an Unresponsive Guest
192
• Care After Extrication
194
• For Your Review
196
Chapter 17 Suspected Spinal Injuries
197
• About the Spine
198
• Recognizing Spinal Injuries
198
• Caring for Spinal Injuries in the Water
199
• Backboarding and Extrication
204
• Special Situations
208
• For Your Review
209
Part Six: Open Water Lifeguarding
Chapter 18 Open Water Lifeguarding
210
• Introduction to Open Water Lifeguarding
211
• The Designated Swimming Area
211
• Managing Guest Safety
213
• Equipment for Open Water Lifeguarding
215
• Open Water Rescues
217
• Missing Guest Search
220
• For Your Review
222
Appendices
Appendix A Sample First Aid Kit
224
Appendix B Sample BBP Exposure Control Plan
225
Index
231
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
In Memory of Louise Priest
This edition of the International Lifeguard Training Program is dedicated to Louise Priest, a tireless aquatics
educator, author, and leader. Louise held leadership positions with the American Red Cross NHQ, Ellis &
Associates, and the Council for the National Cooperation in Aquatics. Louise was one of those select few
"larger than life” individuals who put others ahead of herself, exemplifying the very best of humankind. While
she will be missed, her legacy remains infinitely timeless.
Contributors
Many individuals, agencies, and organizations contributed to the tasks of designing, advising, writing, editing,
reviewing, piloting, and producing this 5th edition of the International Lifeguard Training Program manual
Jeff Ellis & Associates and Jeff Ellis Management National Staff
Benjamin Strong
Darlene Reese-Sittig
Dr. Larry Newell
Dr. Peter Goldberg
Jeffrey Ellis
Jem Hughes
Jennifer Barber
Jeremy Stiles
Jerica Cyr
Joe Stefanyak
Juan Richards
Landon Reed
Luke Martinez
Melanie Woods
Richard Carroll
Steve Miller
Travis Reed
Vinson Needler
External Contributors
Cedar Fair / Cedar Point, OH
City of Tempe Parks and Recreation, AZ
Erin Clancy, Stanfordville, NY
Deric Clinton, YMCA of Delaware
Brandon Cook, Online Design Club, FL
Englewood Parks and Recreation, CO
Megan Hartman, Great Wolf Lodge Resorts
Keith Herrmann, Aurora University, IL
Highlands Ranch Community Association, CO
Hilton Anatole Dallas, TX
Nick Licastro, Great Wolf Lodge Resorts
Katherine Martinez, KP Facilitation, CO
Oakland County Parks, MI
Oostman Aquatics Safety Consulting, Inc, MA
Barbara Phillips, Tell a Story Creative, FL
Plainfield Township, MI
Jose Salazar, Loudoun County Fire & EMS, VA
Ryan Phillips, Safety Skills Training
Six Flags America, MD
Village of Grayslake Aquatic Center, IL
Water Safety Products, Inc. FL
Waukegan Park District, IL
i
ii
WELCOME
Introduction
Congratulations on your decision to become an Ellis & Associates (E&A) lifeguard. Following successful
completion of your course, you will join a select group of aquatic professionals who apply proven state-of-the-
art aquatic injury prevention practices to reduce the number of emergency incidents, and when necessary, to
respond rapidly and effectively to any emergency. As a result of E&A's emphasis on prevention, professionalism,
accountability, and proactive risk management, our safety record is unsurpassed in the aquatic industry.
E&A - A History of Leadership and Innovation
In 1983 our program was created to address waterpark safety issues. Due to the great demand for this quality
program, it quickly expanded to pools, open-water environments, and resorts. Over a period spanning four
decades, E&A has been credited for revolutionizing the safety standards of the aquatic recreational and
amusement industry. Here are but a few E&A industry “firsts”:
• Elevating professional lifeguard standards through operational safety audits for lifeguard accountability
• Developing, implementing, and advocating for industry benchmarks and proactive risk management
standards such as our 10/20 Protection™ and 10/3 Protection™ standards, Vigilance Awareness Training®
(VAT®), and Zone Validation® system
• Developing equipment-based rescues that are safer and more effective than body contact rescues
• Incorporating bloodborne pathogens training into lifeguard training classes
• Introducing supplemental oxygen support (SOS), resuscitation masks, bag valve masks, manual suction devices,
and automated external defibrillators (AEDs) to enhance resuscitation efforts provided by aquatic staff to enhance
lifeguard resuscitation efforts
• Establishing a national database for aquatic injuries and injury prevention
• Offering the first blended e-learning lifeguarding program in the world
Our Educational Philosophy
The emphasis of our lifeguarding curriculum is on preventing aquatic emergencies by consistently monitoring
guests, enforcing rules, and identifying and correcting potential dangers. Should an emergency occur our
lifeguards are prepared to work individually and as members of a team to respond rapidly and professionally.
We do not focus on executing textbook-perfect rescues, as such situations seldom occur in real-life. It is more
important for lifeguards to think critically, rationally, and overcome adverse rescue situations.
To achieve these learning outcomes E&A lifeguard candidates are immersed in the job of the lifeguard while
completing the course. They participate in hands-on lifeguarding activities including proactively scanning zones
as apprentice lifeguards. Through the design and delivery of our curriculum lifeguards exit our program with the
necessary knowledge, skills, and attitude to conduct themselves professionally and confidently.
iii
CONTINUING EDUCATION
Continuing education is a broad term used to recognize forms of post-secondary school learning activities often
associated with job training, maintaining professional certification/licensure, and personal enrichment courses.
Ellis & Associates is pleased to be able to provide Continuing Education Units (CEUs) to those who desire such
upon successful completion of our courses. Health care specialists, aquatic/recreation leaders, educators,
childcare providers, and other professionals can attain CEUs through our approved courses.
As an International Association of Continuing Education (IACET) Accredited Provider, Ellis & Associates offers
CEUs for its programs that qualify under the ANSI/IACET Standard. This prestigious accreditation demonstrates
our commitment to provide high-quality lifelong learning and high standards for all of our programs. We are
proud of our education programs, which reach aquatic safety, supervisory, and healthcare professionals each
year, helping to broaden their skills so that they remain on the cutting edge of education.
ACCREDITED
IACET
PROVIDER
Introduction to Lifeguarding
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION TO
LIFEGUARDING
ELLIS GUAP
EXEITUNE
Learning Outcomes
1
After reading this chapter and completing the related course work,
you should be able to:
• Understand the global problem of drowning
• Explain how lifeguards can help address the drowning problem
• Describe how to be a preventive lifeguard
• List responsibilities of a lifeguard
• Understand legal terms related to lifeguarding
• Relate lifeguard accountability to the standard of care
• Define lifeguard liability
Chapter Overview
Why Lifeguards? (pg 2)
History of Lifeguarding (pg 2)
Drowning: A Global Crisis (pg 3)
Ellis and Associates Lifeguards (pg 4)
Get the Most From Your E&A Lifeguard Training (pg 5)
On-Going Training (pg 7)
Primary Responsibilities of Lifeguards (pg 8)
→ Secondary Responsibilities of Lifeguards (pg 9)
Being Held Accountable (pg 11)
Legal Concepts That Apply to Lifeguards (pg 12)
Standard of Care (pg 14)
Lifeguard Liability (pg 14)
For Your Review (pg 16)
Introduction to Lifeguarding
Why Lifeguards?
Around the world, people of all ages happily swim in aquatic facilities, resort and hotel pools, and on beaches
without worry knowing that lifeguards are on duty providing pro-active surveillance. Facility guests put
their trust and safety in the hands of these well-trained individuals capable of performing water rescues and
emergency care including CPR. If a guest becomes fatigued, injured or at risk for other reasons, the lifeguard
enters the water and helps return the guest to safety. This is the responsibility you agree to take on as an Ellis
and Associates (E&A) trained lifeguard.
History Of Lifeguarding
Some of the earliest, documented cases of lifeguarding can be traced to the 1700s. These early lifeguarding
efforts were primarily designed to aid those serving in battle or traveling the waterways. Comprised of military
and coast guard personnel, these early lifeguards were dedicated to eliminating or minimizing loss of life and
providing rescue and recovery services.
The first of these organizations was China's Chinkiang Association for the Saving of Life, which offered money
and prizes for significant rescues.
Towards the mid-1800s, swimming became a popular pastime and recreational activity. In the United States,
oceanfront hotels and resorts began to dot the landscape in places like Atlantic City, New Jersey, The emerging
railroads would transport thousands of people to Atlantic City during the summer months to enjoy the beaches.
This brought an increased risk for drowning and other incidents. Demand for swimmer protection grew.
In 1855, a town in New Jersey took the first steps towards providing swimmer protection with the first
volunteer lifeguard team for beach patrol called the “Constables of the surf.” The Constables were police
officers tasked with responding to any beach emergency involving swimmers in the water. In the early 1900s
California instituted its first beach lifeguards (Fig 1.1).
Through the years, efforts to protect facility guests continued as more and more organizations looked to
ensure safety, developing training protocols, innovative rescue operations, and improved teaching materials
to better prepare lifeguards for the important task of preventing drownings. Today's professional lifeguard is
better trained, and more equipped than ever before to protect lives in and around the water (Fig 1.2).
2
CALIFOR
0977
ELLIS GUARD
SG
3
Figure 1.1 The lifeguarding profession has a decorated history.
Drowning: A Global Crisis
Figure 1.2 Today's professional lifeguards
Drowning is the third leading cause of unintentional injury and death worldwide. It is the fifth cause of
death globally for children ages one-14 years old, impacting an estimated 360,000 children annually. Death
by drowning occurs in all regions of the world and in all types of economies. Deaths are especially prevalent
in lower and middle-income countries, regions of Africa, and in the Western Pacific and Southeast Asia,
accounting for half of the world's drownings.
Higher risks for drowning include a number of additional factors:
• Alcohol use near the water
• Medical conditions such as seizure disorders
• Tourists unfamiliar with local features and risks
• Unsupervised and unattended children
The main risk factors for drowning involve:
• Lack of swimming ability
• Lack of barriers to prevent unsupervised access
• Children unsupervised
• Failure to wear life jackets
• Alcohol use
• Seizure disorders
U.S. Statistics on Drowning
Drowning is a significant problem in the United States, ranking fifth among the causes of unintentional injury
deaths. Everyday about ten people die from unintentional drowning. About one in five people who die from
drowning are children 14 years of age or younger. For every child who dies from drowning, another five
receive emergency department care for serious, nonfatal submersion injuries.
Did You Know?
• Worldwide drowning is the third leading cause of unintentional injury death.
• In the U.S. more than 3600 people die from unintentional drowning annually; about two in 10 are
children 14 years old and younger.
Ellis & Associates (E&A) Lifeguards
Having a lifeguard is the only consistently proven
means of preventing drownings and other tragic
incidents, in and around water. The best lifeguards
are those who are highly trained, professional, and
most of all, accountable (Figure 1.3).
In 1983, Ellis & Associates was founded to create the
best lifeguards in the aquatic industry to meet the needs
of an emerging industry - water parks. E&A lifeguards
have a mission to prevent submersion incidents and
potential loss of life and are held accountable to a high
standard of care. As an E&A trained lifeguard, your goal
is zero drownings annually.
LIFECARD
ARD
Figure 1.3 Professional lifeguards are highly trained
and accountable for their actions.
E&A's International Lifeguard Training Program (ILTP®) stresses values that include safety, consistency, and integrity.
• Safety - Guests and employees of aquatics facilities trust you with their personal safety. You are
responsible for providing a safe environment for them and yourself. To accomplish this, you must pro-
actively identify and manage risk.
• Consistency - To uphold the E&A Standard, you will consistently represent the E&A Philosophy and
effectively meet the skill and knowledge competencies of this program.
• Integrity - Being an E&A lifeguard requires a passion for aquatic safety. You will sincerely care about the
lives and well-being of those you protect. You will feel a sense of commitment and hold yourself personally
accountable to the swimmers you protect, the E&A training program, and your fellow lifeguards.
As a result of our collective emphasis on lifeguard professionalism, prevention, accountability, and
proactive risk management, E&A's safety record is unmatched in the aquatic industry.
The vigilance of E&A lifeguards along with their commitment to E&A training standards has been proven
effective in preventing drownings and providing quality care in the event of an emergency.
4
E&A Lifeguard Results
• E&A lifeguards protect more than 70 million guests annually at many of the world's most complex
aquatic facilities.
• E&A lifeguards make approximately 35,000 rescues each year, in which no further care is necessary.
Get The Most From Your E&A
Lifeguard Training
As an E&A lifeguard candidate participating in this course, you can achieve one of four different certifications
as noted below.
You will be required to take prerequisite screening tests to assess general swimming skills. Table 1.1 describes
the necessary skill requirements for each of the different certifications.
Table 1.1 Prerequisite Tests
Certification
Swim Distance
Dive Brick Depth Retrieval
Shallow water
50 yards/meters
5 feet (1.5 m) and underwater
swim of 10 feet.
Pool
100 yards/meters
8 feet (2.4 m) or deepest
facility depth designated
Special Facilities
with Wave Pool
200 yards/meters
8 feet (2.4 m) or deepest
facility depth designated
Special Facilities
200 yards/meters
with Open Water
8 feet (2.4 m) or deepest
facility depth designated
Treading Water
No requirement
Tread without use of arms &
hands for 1 minute
Tread without use of arms &
hands for 2 minutes
Tread without use of arms &
hands for 2 minutes
All levels: The ability to exit standard pools unassisted from pool edge, without use of ladder or stairs.
General Course Rules
Before you arrive:
• Review the course syllabus and any other supportive documentation issued prior to the first scheduled
class for specific course pre-requisites, course completion evaluation standards and any other general
course information
5
During your course:
• Be on time for all sessions
• Use sun protection such as a hat, sunglasses, and sunscreen when outdoors
• Enter the water feet first
• Only enter the pool after someone has been designated as the lifeguard on duty
• Be professional, have a proper attitude, act maturely, and use good judgment
If you fail to pass or meet all the course requirements, you will be requested to repeat the course until the
learning outcomes are achieved to be eligible for an E&A lifeguard credential.
Course Completion
To successfully complete lifeguard training, you will be required to:
• Attend all scheduled classes
• Follow all course rules
• Meet all course requirements
• Perform skills to test-ready levels. This includes all water rescue lifesaving technique skills,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), AED, first aid, and supplemental oxygen support (SOS)
• Pass the written examination with a minimum score of 80%
Credentials
E&A lifeguard credentials are valid for one (1) year and only in the aquatic environments specified by the
certification type. Credentials must be renewed each year.
• Shallow water lifeguard training – appropriate at facilities with aquatic attractions with a maximum
water depth is 5 feet (1.5 meters), excluding wave pool and open water environments
• Pool lifeguard training – appropriate at facilities with aquatic attractions of various depths, excluding
wave pools and open water environments
• Special facilities with wave pool lifeguard training – appropriate at facilities that operate a wave pool
and other aquatic attractions of various depths, excluding open water environments
• Special facilities with open water lifeguard training – appropriate at facilities that operate a designated
swimming area in an open water environment
6
Your training often continues after your lifeguard course is completed. Your aquatic facility is likely to
provide you with the additional training you need to effectively perform at your specific job location. Those
requirements will be made clear by your employer. Additional training may be provided:
• Pre-service training – what takes place before you start working
• In-service training/meetings – Training completed after the lifeguard course but before you officially
begin working as a lifeguard
• Operational drills/audits – periodic testing to ensure you remain “test ready"
Pre-Service Training
Pre-service training may review how the concepts learned in a lifeguarding class apply at a specific site.
Additional information may be provided such as:
• How the Emergency Action Plan (EAP) is applied at specific locations
• Reviewing skills for operating in specific facility locations
• Reviewing the standard operating procedures for the facility/attraction
In-Service Training
In-service training is intended to serve as an
ongoing practice session for you to maintain and
enhance your skills learned during the original
lifeguard class. In-service training can also be an
opportunity for feedback on skill performance.
In-service is also an excellent time to have
lifeguard team meetings to review skill concepts.
Your supervisor and company are responsible for
scheduling and delivering your in-service training
sessions. It is important that you attend these
sessions as they contribute to your professionalism
and help keep your skills sharp (Figure 1.4).
Operational Drills/Audits
Figure 1.4 In-service training helps to keep your skills
sharp.
Operational drills and audits are conducted by some facilities throughout the operating day. These operational
drills and audits may include lifeguard evaluations that can include the use of people, manikins or silhouette dolls
to monitor your vigilance. Some drills may also involve scenarios where rescue skills are performed. As an E&A
lifeguard, you should embrace all opportunities to both improve and demonstrate your lifeguarding abilities.
7
E&A lifeguards are professional first responders. Your primary job function is to prevent aquatic emergencies.
But not all incidents are foreseeable and preventable. In such cases you must also know how to recognize,
respond, and render appropriate care.
Preventive Lifeguarding
Preventive lifeguarding is a critical and demanding
part of your lifeguarding job. A lifeguard must
remain alert and work to prevent emergencies.
As a lifeguard, people rely on you to prevent
catastrophic incidents. This job requires your
undivided attention. If you allow yourself to
become distracted while lifeguarding, it could
result in a loss of life. It is a difficult job, but it is
very rewarding (Figure 1.5).
Preventive lifeguarding involves items such as:
• Being alert
• Enforcing facility rules
Figure 1.5 Lifeguarding is a demanding job that
requires you to remain alert at all times.
• Answering swimmer's questions while continuing to effectively scan your zone
• Warning guests of potential hazards
• Following your training
• Notifying your supervisor when you cannot see all your assigned area
• Communicating with other lifeguards about hazards in the water
Expect the Unexpected
Guests can be unpredictable. They may enter water depths or elements that may cause them to get into
trouble. The water conditions may become too challenging for a swimmer to manage on their own and require
a rescue. They may suffer a medical emergency in or out of the water.
It is your job as a lifeguard to recognize when a swimmer is in trouble and to quickly react to render care.
Recognizing an emergency means you must maintain a high level of vigilance, effectively scanning your
assigned zone. Managing an aquatic emergency means reacting as trained, in a safe and effective manner
(Figure 1.6).
8
Secondary
Responsibilities
Of Lifeguards
As a lifeguard you will have numerous secondary
responsibilities such as:
• Inspecting the facility
• Documentation
• Cleaning the facility
• Testing water chemistry
• Crowd control
• Providing guest services
ELLIS GUARD
9
Figure 1.6 When a guest is in trouble you must recognize
the emergency and respond promptly.
Inspecting the Facility
You may be required to inspect your facility before opening it for daily guests. This inspection will attest
to the facility being in appropriate operating condition. This includes having a means of calling 9-1-1, and
appropriately operating safety and response equipment.
Documentation
Your facility may require you to maintain accurate documentation. Each facility is likely to have records and
reports specific to its unique operation such as:
• Daily sign-in sheets
• Facility inspection checklists
• Attendance records
• Lifeguard rotation logs
• Facility maintenance records
• Equipment inspection forms
• Rescue reports
• Incident and witness reports
• Daily work schedules
• Water chemistry logs
• Weather condition reports
• In-service training records
• Attraction downtime records
Rescue reports and Incident/Witness statement reports are among the most important paperwork you will
complete. The documentation must be completed as soon as the incident or rescue has been resolved. Make
sure to fill in each section completely. These forms may become legal records in the future, and adequate
documentation will minimize problems at that time.
Cleaning the Facility
You may be required to clean your facility area and visitor seating areas daily, and collect debris or rubbish in the
area, potentially preventing it from blowing in the pool and contaminating the water. You may also be expected to
vacuum the pools, skim the top of the pool to remove debris, and clean pool walls, patio areas, and other areas
of the facility. These tasks are part of preventive lifeguarding which removes hazards and potential risks that could
cause problems later. A lifeguard who removes puddles from the pool patio area can help eliminate a potential
algae hazard that causes a slippery surface. As a professional lifeguard, it is your task to keep your facility and
area clean eliminating potential risks and hazards
(Figure 1.7).
Testing Water Chemistry
Some facilities may require that you test and
monitor the water chemistry of the swimming pool
before opening the pool and throughout the day to
ensure that it matches the requirements based on
the guidelines listed in your local codes and/or the
MAHC recommendations. If your facility requires
you to test the water chemicals as a part of your job
responsibility, your facility should provide you with
additional training for this task. If you are responsible
for adding chemicals and managing the pumps, you
may be required to take a separate course to become
trained as a Certified Pool Operator (CPO), Aquatic
Facility Operator (AFO) or complete a unique
facility requirement training course (Figure 1.8).
10
Figure 1.7 Secondary tasks include keeping your
facility clean.
Kiefer
DANGER
KEEP OFF
Figure 1.8 You may have to test water chemistry as
part of your job responsibilities.
Crowd Control
During an emergency, crowds may gather around the scene and you will be tasked with controlling the
situation. Know your facility's emergency action plan (EAP) to be prepared for any incident requiring crowd
control. Crowd control might be necessary during guests altercations, special events, severe weather
conditions, rescues with resuscitation efforts, chemical leaks, and terrorism threats. Become familiar with all
the access and exit points in case an area needs to be evacuated in the facility or a path needs to open so that
emergency medical services (EMS) personnel can access a scene to render care and/or support.
When you need to control a crowd:
• Remain calm
• Speak loudly and with authority
• Give clear, precise and simple instructions
Providing Guest Services
Lifeguards are the employees of the facility most noticeable to guests. You are likely to encounter guests asking
questions about the attractions, directions to various points in the facility, advise on caring for sunburn, and
many others. You will be interacting with guests to make certain they understand and comply with the rules of
the facility. Be professional in all your interactions with guests, determine their needs, and resolve any guest
issues in a cordial manner. If you are uncertain about how to help a guest, contact a supervisor.
11
Being Held Accountable
As a lifeguard you are expected to anticipate, recognize, and manage aquatic emergencies. Your training does
not end after the course. Your skills need to be maintained at a test-ready level throughout your credential
validity period. As an E&A lifeguard you are accountable to:
• Facility guests - Provide a safe environment for guests, while minimizing hazardous situations whenever
possible and responding appropriately to emergency situations.
• Your employer - Perform the duties outlined and taught to you when you were hired. Show dedication
in your work, commitment to your job, and perform at or above expectations. While at work, you can
expect to be evaluated on your performance on a regular basis.
• Yourself - Believe in your abilities to perform the tasks of the job. Practice your skills so that you are
capable and confident in your abilities. Seek clarification from a supervisor or lifeguard instructor if you
do not understand something. Know that you are responsible for human lives each day you show up
for work. Evaluate your own performance on a continuous basis. A professional lifeguard accepts the
responsibility of protecting the lives of others.
Accountability Through Audits
Lifeguards can be held accountable through
performance evaluations that include audits. Audits
verify that lifeguards are still maintaining their test-
ready commitment to their lifeguard training. Some
lifeguards are audited solely by their employer
while others may be audited by E&A auditors.
E&A conducts audits that evaluate lifeguard
accountability and skills performance (Figure 1.9).
Audits typically measure a lifeguard's ability to:
• Act professionally
• Remain vigilant
• Provide proactive surveillance of the assigned
Zone of Protection, and the ability to recognize
and react to a distressed guest
Figure 1.9 Professional lifeguards embrace
operational drills and audits.
• Appropriate scan an assigned Zone of Protection, demonstrating recognition of a guest in distress
• Respond and manage simulated aquatic emergencies
• Protect oneself from the environment
• Demonstrate rescue readiness
• Function within your aquatic facility's emergency action plan
Professional lifeguards embrace audit accountability as an opportunity to demonstrate all aspects of their
job. The auditing process helps you and your fellow lifeguards to prevent, recognize, and respond to aquatic
emergencies. Lifeguard accountability saves lives!
12
Legal Concepts That Apply
To Lifeguards
There are legal concepts that apply to you as a professional lifeguard. It is important that you understand how
these concepts apply to your job:
Abandonment – When you begin to render care, it must be continued until emergency medical services (EMS)
personnel or someone with equal or greater training arrives and takes over. You can be held legally responsible for
abandoning a person who requires ongoing care if they leave the scene or stop providing care.
Confidentiality - While rendering care to a guest, you may learn something about the injured or ill person, such as
personal information about medical conditions, physical problems and medications taken. This person has a right
to privacy and is protected by laws that require you to keep information confidential. The media, investigators,
law enforcement, attorneys and even insurance companies, may ask questions following an incident. This
information should not be shared with anyone except EMS personnel directly associated with the person's care.
Sharing someone's personal medical information with individuals not directly associated with the care of the
injured person may constitute a breach of the victim's privacy and could cause legal problems.
Consent - Permission to render appropriate first aid emergency care. Verbally seek consent to provide care to
a responsive (conscious) guests in distress who needs first aid. The guest's consent is referred to as informed
consent. This does not apply to guests who are unresponsive (unconscious) or confused. In such cases it is implied
(implied consent) that the guest would give approval to receive care if he or she were able to do so.
Documentation - Properly documenting injuries and incidents is critical. If legal action occurs later, your facility
records and reports can provide a legal record of what happened. It is important to compete any required witness
and incident forms as soon as possible after