learn to •
swim
+
+
ROB & KATHY MCKAY
learn to •
Swim
Step-by-step water confidence and safety
skills for babies and young children
DK
DK PUBLISHING, INC.
DK
LONDON, NEW YORK, MUNICH, MELBOURNE, DELHI
Senior editor Salima Hirani
Senior US editor Jennifer Williams
Senior art editor Hannah Moore
Project editor Claire Wedderburn-Maxwell
Project art editor Tracy Timson
DTP designer Julian Dams
Production controller Shwe Zin Win
Managing editor Liz Coghill
Managing art editors Glenda Fisher, Emma Forge
Photographic art director Tracy Timson
Art director Carole Ash
Publishing manager Anna Davidson
Publishing director Corinne Roberts
First American Edition 2005
05 06 07 08 09 10 9 8 76543 21
Published in the United States in 2005 by
DK Publishing, Inc., 375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
Copyright © 2005 Dorling Kindersley Limited, London
Text copyright © 2005 Rob and Kathy McKay
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of the copyright owners.
Neither the authors nor the publisher can be held responsible for any
damage or injury resulting from baby swimming.
Catologing-in-publication data is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN 0-7566-0955-0
Reproduced by Colourscan, Singapore
Printed and bound by Star Standard, Singapore
See our complete product line at www.dk.com
+
CONTENTS
6
INTRODUCTION
60
The Breath-holding Cue
96
Guided Swim to the Wall
62
Face-to-Face Dip
98
Jump, Dip, and Swim
8
INTRODUCING
63
Jump from the Wall
100
Turning Around Underwater
BABY
64
First Held Underwater Swim
102
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO
66
First Unaided Underwater
SWIMMING
103
Stage Two Lesson Plan
Swim
104
Intermediate Swim to the
10
The Benefits of Baby
68
Balance
Wall
Swimming
69
Time to Go
105 Jump, Swim, and Turn Back
12
Positive Teaching Methods
70
BEGINNERS: STAGE TWO
to the Wall
18
How Children Develop
71
Stage Two Lesson Plan
106
Unaided Turn Underwater
20
Signs to Stop
72
Kicking Drills
108
The Safety Sequence
22
Choosing a Suitable Pool
73
Blowing Bubbles
24
Safety
110
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
74
Reaching for and Grabbing
26
What You Need-The Basics
111
Stage Three Lesson Plan
the Wall
28
Toys and Learning Aids
112
76
Learning to Wait
30
Questions and Answers
Coming Up for Air-
Assisted
77
Monkey Walk
78 ADAPTATIONS FOR THREE- TO
34
WATER
114 Coming Up for Air-
Equipment
FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS
116
Front and Back Floating
CONFIDENCE
79 Adapted Lesson Plan
118
36 Teaching Beginners
80
Facial Submersions
120
38 Bathtime Fun
Swimming on the Back
180° Roll During a Swim
82
First Short Swim
40 First Trip to the Pool
122
Diving for Rings
44 Water Adjustment
84
Standing Step Jump
46 Water Pouring Station
85
Alligator Walk
124
Resources
48 Games and Songs
126
Index
86
SWIMMING
128
Acknowledgements
52
The Activity Circuit
UNAIDED
54
BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
88 Teaching Intermediates
55
Stage One Lesson Plan
56
Kicking
90
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE
57
Above-water Pass
91
Stage One Lesson Plan
58 Cheek Dip
92
Rob's Tai Chi Pass
59
Cheek Roll
94
Fin Fun
INTRODUCTION
Learning to swim can be one of the most rewarding experiences of childhood. It is a
celebration, a rite of passage, and a gift of freedom. Reintroducing your baby to the water
at a young age makes perfect sense—after all, your little swimmer was surrounded by
water in the womb for nine months.
People around the world use water for relaxation, play, therapy, ritual, health, nourishment,
invigoration, and exercise. Water is an integral part of our human heritage, physical make-up,
and planet. In water we are weightless, free, caressed, and cleansed. Babies can enter this unique
natural element and its altered gravity in a non-stressful, harmonious manner. Your baby can
learn to swim months before he can walk, and it will be easier for him to propel himself to you
in the water, rather than learn to pull himself up, fight gravity, and walk toward you. None of us
remember learning to walk, and in much the same way a baby who learns to swim at an early
age, as part of a gradual, child-centered approach, won't remember a time when he couldn't
swim and claim water citizenship.
Who better to teach your baby to swim than the people he trusts the most? We believe
parents are a baby's best teachers, on land and in the water, and have therefore adapted our
established swim-school program specifically for this book, so that we can pass on the wealth
of knowledge we have gained from our nurturing and stimulating child-friendly classes. Learn to
Swim is designed to help parents establish an optimal learning environment for children aged
six months to four years. Utilizing our combined 50 years of experience in teaching thousands
of babies and children to swim, we will guide you to successfully create a watery classroom
full of positive reinforcement, color, music, stimulation, laughter, and motivation.
Our commonsense approach places your child at the center of the learning. He will learn and
develop swimming skills through games, songs, humor, praise, and developmentally appropriate
skill activities. You will follow a child-paced, step-by-step learning progression especially designed
for very young swimmers. And although this book is for parents who are teaching their own
children to swim, we hope swimming teachers will also find it useful and integrate our gentle
approach to baby swimming into their programs.
Learning is a process, not a product—it should occur at the child's pace, when he is open,
receptive, relaxed, and ready. We teach swimming—not thrashing—and that takes patience,
practice, and a great deal of time, and when you give your child that time and patience, you lay
a foundation of mutual respect and trust that you can build on in other areas of your lives.
Teaching your child to swim in this supportive and caring way is not just about helping him to
learn water confidence and safety skills. It is also about developing a teaching style in relation
to the way your child learns, encouraging and supporting him rather than being demanding
and demeaning, and replacing the pressure to learn with the desire to learn.
Celebrate each small step along the way, and remember that there is no need to rush or
force your child to perform as there will be periods of skill assimilation and learning plateaus.
Read your baby's body language and assess his level of readiness to determine the course of
each lesson. We want your child to enjoy this experience from his very first trip to the pool, in
the hope that he will continue to enjoy swimming for a lifetime. As you play with your baby
in the pool, you are not only teaching movement through the water, but fostering exploration,
curiosity, trust, joy, wonder, risk-taking, confidence, grace, and endurance.
In the first chapter of the book, we introduce all the essential basics: the philosophy of our
teaching; the many benefits of baby swimming, what you need to take to the pool, positive
child-friendly teaching methods, and comprehensive water-safety strategies. The second chapter,
Water Confidence, is divided into stages that are based on age. In this chapter, we take you
through the initial phases of water adjustment, how to teach your child to hold his breath for
submersion, then onward toward the exciting moment when your baby takes his first swim
between two people. Once your baby can comfortably perform all the age-appropriate skills in
this section, you will move on to the intermediate swimming skills, such as turning around
underwater, floating, and diving for rings, as shown in the third chapter, Swimming Unaided.
We hope this family experience is a remarkable one for both you and your child. Delight in the
giggles and splashes, the time you have to bond in the pool, and the excitement and pride your
child shows as he develops new skills. So grab your swimsuits and let's go to the pool...
My me Kay and Yatky makany
INTRODUCING
BABY
SWIMMING
Water, babies, laughter, and learning to swim... it's an unbeatable
combination. When approached in a nurturing, child-friendly way,
baby swimming offers your child numerous benefits, including boundless
joy and increased self-esteem and confidence. It enhances your baby's
physical and personal development, resulting in a happy, healthy, and
well-adjusted child. Our journey begins with an important first step-an
informed parent. The goal of this chapter is to help you become a
confident, active, and trusted learning partner for your child.
10
INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
THE BENEFITS OF BABY SWIMMING
There is a wide range of benefits available to babies and children who are taught
to swim in a gentle, gradual, child-paced way. Researchers have documented some
of the measurable positive effects of baby swimming, and parents around the world
have witnessed first-hand the many enhancements to mental, physical, emotional,
developmental, and social well-being that result from teaching their children to swim.
EMOTIONAL BENEFITS
Swimming allows babies to move independently
much sooner than they are able to on dry land.
Imagine the boost of confidence and self-esteem that
movement through the water brings your child as
she explores her new, watery environment. Every time
you catch your child after a jump or a short swim,
she learns trust. When you praise her for each small
achievement on the way to mastering a skill, you
build her self-esteem. Babies' faces glow after they
successfully accomplish a task they look for approval
and validation, and parental acknowledgement of their
efforts fosters their personal self-acceptance and pride.
Swimming can be very empowering for babies, since it
offers them a new sense of freedom.
Parent-child bonding
Where else but in the water can you commune face-
to-face, skin-to-skin with your baby for extended
periods of time in a warm and inviting natural element?
Teaching your baby to swim increases your bond with
her as you play together and move in unison, and as
you exercise patience, encouragement, and kindness
toward her. You will learn about her growing
personality, sense of humor, and how she approaches
new situations. As you teach her, you will become
aware of her learning style and her changing needs
and abilities. This knowledge will not only aid successful
baby swimming but will also help you establish positive
parenting methods that you can use outside the pool.
STUDIES ON
BABY SWIMMING
A study conducted by Professor Liselott Diem
from 1974 to 1976 at the German Sports
College in Cologne, Germany, found that
children who learned to swim at an early age
demonstrated advanced development in:
◎ motor skills
reaction time (reflexes)
power of concentration (focus)
intelligence
social behavior
social interaction
◎ self-confidence
independence
coping with new and unfamiliar situations.
Overall, children were found to be more
well-adjusted than their peers who had not
participated in early swimming programs, and the
increase in both self-esteem and independence
due to baby swimming were cited as contributory
factors. The study also concluded that children
who swam from an early age benefitted from
positive interaction and bonding with their parent.
THE BENEFITS OF BABY SWIMMING
11
SOCIAL BENEFITS
If you can gather a group of like-minded parents and
teach your children together, they will reap the social
benefits-they learn from their peers by observing and
mimicking them, and also enjoy their company. Children
begin to look forward to interacting with each other,
learning to take turns, to share, and to try new skills.
PHYSICAL BENEFITS
All the fitness benefits that swimming brings adults
-an increase in strength, muscle tone, endurance, and
lung capacity-are also enjoyed by children. For young
babies, movement through the water liberates them
from a comparatively static life, and allows them to
exercise muscles that would otherwise not yet be used.
For older babies, swimming is the natural complement
to their growing repertoire of land-based skills. Because
both sides of the body are involved, and therefore both
lobes of the brain, swimming increases coordination,
motor development, and balance. Parents also see better
sleep patterns after swimming.
PERSONAL SAFETY
With time, practice, and developmental capability,
children can acquire the necessary swimming safety
skills to aid them in the event of a water emergency.
A calm child who feels at home in the water and who
has regularly practiced safety skills with her parent will
not panic, but will rather proactively implement the
techniques she has learned. Note, however, that no child
should ever be considered "drownproof," and you should
always be vigilant when your child is in the water.
12
INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS
Being a proactive, positive parent directly helps to nurture a well-adjusted, happy child.
When teaching your baby at such a young age, you have the opportunity to build trust,
share joy, communicate by touch and words, and bond with your child as he experiences
new and varied stimuli. The impact you have on your child at this young age cannot be
overestimated, and baby swimming is a unique opportunity to develop and put good
teaching practices into action.
THE CHILD-CENTERED APPROACH
We live in an era that has benefitted from research into
the capabilities of babies. No longer seen simply as little
lumps, babies regularly astound scientists with their
innate abilities. We now know how even a very young
baby can discern faces, language, and emotion, and how
activities and experiences affect his mental development.
Although babies develop many skills from an early
age, parents should not attempt to create a "super
baby." Children should not be pressured or pushed
to perform, but guided to develop their skills
at a rate they are comfortable with.
PROGRESS AT YOUR CHILD'S PACE
Just as children learn to walk, talk, and read at different
ages, they also learn to swim at different rates. As a
parent, it is critical that you do not place any
accelerated expectations ahead of your child's actual
readiness to learn a skill. All children learn to kick when
they swim-but some do it on the first day, while
others do it only after a great deal of time, motivation,
and practice. Kicking on the first day doesn't make one
child better, smarter, or stronger than another child
who learns later—it simply means they are different
and unique individuals.
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS
13
Don't worry about how quickly your child learns a new
technique-just focus on helping him acquire a skill a
little bit at a time. Make the most of the process and
the time you are spending together doing an activity
you both enjoy, and remember the most important
thing is to make your lessons fun and playful.
Comfort in the pool
Both children and parents bring with them a host of
previous water experiences—some positive and some
negative. Some babies have been in the bath or shower
with water pouring over their face from just a few days
old, others have seen their older brother or sister swim
underwater, and still others are fearful of the water
because of a water scare or a previous bad experience
with an aggressive swimming program. Some children are
shy and want to assess a new situation from a distance;
others show an inherent aversion to having water on
their faces, but some will bolt immediately into a new
environment without a care.
Remember also, if you are the gregarious parent of
a reserved and cautious child, you will need to respect
the fact that you have your own individual differences,
and learn from your child what makes him secure,
comfortable, and happy in the pool.
THE IMPORTANCE OF
BODY LANGUAGE
Even before your baby can speak, he is a very
capable interpreter of your body language, and
will pick up on the slightest nuances. Your facial
expressions, muscle tension, tone of voice, and
reactions will all convey clues to your child about
his environment and how he should act. It is
therefore vital that you are relaxed and confident
with him in the water, as he will pick up on your
cues, whether positive or negative.
A relaxed, gentle touch and upbeat, playful, or
calm tone conveys a sense of ease to your child.
Use positive signals such as smiles, hugs, high-
fives, applause, laughter, or a kiss to reassure your
child and reinforce a positive atmosphere.
Don't send mixed signals-for example, don't
force your child to carry out a maneuver and then
give him a hug or a kiss. Use encouragement
rather than coercion.
You should carefully watch and interpret your
child's body language-especially if he is too
young to speak. This will help you assess his
comfort level and whether he is happy with the
skills or games that you are practicing.
A relaxed, happy, smiling child is enjoying the
experience. Note that his muscles will feel soft, not
tight or tense.
If your child is clinging to you, it means that he
is not ready and needs more time to adjust to the
new situation. Don't rush him or pull him away
from you give him the security he is seeking.
Crying is your baby's way of telling you that
something is wrong and signals a need to stop
what you are doing. Redirect your child's attention
with a toy or by playing a different game, and
assess what caused the crying.
14
INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
FEAR VERSUS LOVE
Some parents and swimming programs see water as the
enemy-a lethal danger to be feared, and a threat to be
dealt with. These “drownproofing” or “survival” swimming
programs often rely on aggressive methods, such as
forced back floating. Skills are goal-oriented and must be
acquired rapidly by the baby in order for her to save
herself if she enters the water unexpectedly. A parent is
generally not present in the water during the lessons in
case the child relies on her parent to help her.
These aggressive methods are in complete opposition
to the child-centered approach, which is based on love
of the child, love of water, and love of learning. We
believe that this positive focus, and the fun it fosters,
leads to much more successful learning than a fearful
environment can produce. Water is seen as a wonderful
medium for growth and development, and the parent is
always in the water, bonding with his or her child,
facilitating learning, and assisting with the gradual
acquisition of skills. This means that the parent knows
exactly what their child can and cannot do in the water,
how long she can hold her breath, and how competent
a swimmer she is. The parent also recognizes their own
responsibility to safeguard their baby and to implement
a comprehensive water safety strategy (see pp24-25).
COPING WITH CRANKINESS
Everybody is allowed a bad day occasionally, and
sometimes children will have a bad five minutes or
an entirely bad week. Often this crankiness may be
unrelated to swimming—teething is a common problem,
as is a missed or interrupted nap, hunger, or a change
in schedule (for example if one parent is away). It is
important for you to be sensitive to the physical energy
levels and mood of your child and to not push her.
Hopefully, just being in the water will help your child
feel better. If you are swimming with other children,
your child will benefit from observing everyone else
swimming. Observation time for a child may mean she
will try a skill later in the bath or on her next trip to
the pool, mimicking what she saw earlier. Use these "off"
days to focus on the skills that your child enjoys, relax
the pace of your lesson, and sing and play together.
YOUR ROLE IN THE POOL
Being in the water with your child is vital as it creates an
immediate sense of security. A parent provides familiarity
and can progress through the lesson at the child's pace.
Is your child relaxed and ready to try something new,
or is she tense, stressed, or frightened and in need
of more time to adjust? The parent's role is one of
conscious and aware observer as well as instructor.
How you present new material and skills to your child
will be as important as the skills themselves. As this is
a child-centered approach, always go at her pace, and
remember that your tone of voice, mood, and muscle
tension send strong messages (see box, p13).
COMPARING
TEACHING METHODS
Aggressive swimming programs use pressure
and coercion to achieve rigid goals. The child-
centered approach is very different, and
progresses at the child's pace.
GOAL-DOMINATED
PROGRAM
skill comes first
time-frame is rigid,
and there is pressure
to perform
force and coercion
are used to teach
survival skills
teacher is dominant
no-nonsense format
CHILD-CENTERED
PROGRAM
child comes first
time-frame is flexible
and depends on
child's readiness
gentle guiding and
encouragement help a
child accomplish goals
progress at child's pace
fun, playful learning
15
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS
FOCUS ON THE MOMENT
Because your child's swimming lessons may be his first
educational outing, they should be positive experiences
that lead to many other educational successes as he
grows up. It's up to you to get into your child's frame
of mind: focus on the game, the adventure, the color,
the fun, and the laughter. Remember that your child
will be much more focused on the moment-on the
simple delights and novel experiences—and shouldn't
be rushed. Try to recall how thrilling your first trip
to a swimming pool was and what your child must be
excited by: the feel of water on his skin, the bright
toys, the sight of water all around him, and the other
people in the pool.
MAKING SWIMMING LESSONS FUN
Crying is not a prerequisite for learning to swim, so
never let an ill-informed relative or teacher tell you that
this is the case. Add skills slowly when your child is ready,
never pushing him beyond his abilities, and remember
that forcing skills on children is contrary to every sound
learning theory. Your own swimming program should
resemble all the best land-based programs for the relevant
age group and contain those elements that best suit early
education-games, toys, fun, and laughter.
Being patient
Make sure that you are relaxed and having fun during
your swimming lessons, enjoying the giggles and splashes
that naturally accompany learning. Be patient with your
child if he hates jumping off the wall or putting his face
in the water he is bound to surprise you in the end.
Don't let your tone of voice or your words betray you
and indicate to your child your disappointment or
frustration. Instead, try another tactic or switch to
another skill. Often, simply time and exposure are
required before a new skill seems less intimidating,
and begins to look like fun and worth trying.
Using humor
Somehow, silliness has become the universal unspoken
language that all children understand. Whether you're
playing peekaboo with a baby or creating an elaborate
pirate fantasy with a four-year-old, these children know
we're doing something fun and want to be a part of it.
Use play and toys to your advantage—they are great
learning aids as well as good distractions after a child
does something they are not sure of, like a first
submersion. The more involved your child is in the
game, the less likely he is to realize that he is trying
something new that might be daunting.
KEYS TO AN OPTIMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
To ensure that your child has the best possible
environment in which to learn to swim, follow
these guidelines:
The parent should always be in the water. This
provides instant security and familiarity and promotes
trust and bonding
Have frequent lessons. Repetition and practice
encourage smooth, consistent learning that closely
resembles a baby's natural learning pattern
Warm, clear water is essential for baby swimming.
Babies do not have a fully developed thermal
regulatory system so the water needs to be warm.
Good water quality also ensures health and safety.
(See Choosing a Suitable Pool, pp22–23)
Develop a positive learning environment. Create an
atmosphere that appeals to the senses by using water
play activities, games, songs, and colorful toys (see Toys
and Learning Aids, pp28–29).
16
INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
Encouraging toddlers
Once your baby begins evolving into a toddler, signs
of emerging independence may challenge your
parenting skills and require more patience both in the
pool and at home. During this developmental stage the
operative word is “no,” and “no” may truly mean “no” or
it may mean “yes” or even “maybe.” It is important at
this stage not to make the pool a battleground, as
pushing a child who is pushing you usually backfires.
Instead, increase the amount of play and slapstick in
your routine, and use games, distractions, and rapidly
changing, entertaining lessons to keep this age group
motivated and interested.
Communicating with your child
Think about how you phrase
things, and always talk
about what you are going
to do in a positive
rather than a negative
way. For example, ask
your child to "Jump
and splash me and get
me all wet," rather than
saying, "Jump to me—the
water's not going to hurt you.” Always appeal to a
child's sense of fun and humor-for example, dripping
water on the face can be called a “fishy kiss.” Remember
to always praise every achievement, however small.
If you want to stop your child from doing
something, then don't just say “no,” but use
another tactic. For example, if he is
jumping before you finish the
count, ask him to count aloud
with you, then jump.
Imaginary play Encourage
older children to try new skills
through imaginary play. For
example, diving for a pirate's
hidden treasure trove sounds
far more exciting than simply
diving for rings.
17
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS
HOW CHILDREN DEVELOP
Every child develops at her own pace, but there are common developmental stages that
all children pass through. The exercises in this book are set out according to these stages,
so your child will never be learning water skills that she is not yet ready to acquire.
Whether your child is a six-month-old baby who loves
the water and swims like a dolphin, or a three-year-old
whose mood changes daily about whether she likes the
water or not, you need to be aware of what your child
is physically capable of and the best way to teach her.
BABIES FROM 6 TO 12 MONTHS
The majority of babies in this age group love the
water-they enjoy their bath and happily make
the transition from tub to pool. They are content
with water poured in small amounts over their heads
and faces, which makes the water adjustment phase
easier and briefer than for older babies.
What to expect in the pool
Babies up to nine months love to splash and wriggle in
the water, and show the rapid whole body undulation
of the dolphin- or froglike reflex kick. Between six and
12 months the reflex kick fades away and is replaced by
gliding for a while, until a learned kick is acquired later.
Babies may stare a great deal, but as their age
increases you begin to see a more alert and focused
child. Learning the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60-61)
also shows parents the difference between a reflex
reaction and a skill that the child actually learns.
Younger babies also tend to be more sensitive to
water temperature. They can become chilly faster, tire
more quickly, and sleep much longer after swimming.
The benefits of swimming
For nearly all babies in this age group, swimming will
be the first educational experience out of the home
environment, and it is important to make it a positive
one. In general, parents of younger babies tend to be
nervous, when taking their child swimming, but don't
worry you will find that your baby is very durable,
and that both of you are very capable.
Within this age group lies the golden opportunity
to quite easily become at home on, in, and under
the water. The young baby is still close to the fluid
environment she left in the womb-she has no fears,
and is not yet claiming independence. Once babies are
comfortably swimming at this young age, they will never
know a time when they didn't know how to swim. They
will not be afraid of the water and can learn safety skills
sooner than children who start at an older age.
TODDLERS FROM ONE TO THREE YEARS
Sturdy legs, an evolving kick, increased coordination,
and a sense of humor typifies this age group of
swimmers. This broad age span includes beginning
walkers to running toddlers, non-verbal babblers to
competent speakers, and easygoing one-year-olds to
independence-testing three-year-olds.
Because of their interest in manipulating toys and
objects, as well as the fact that they can understand
games and observe actions and consequences, children
of this age are prime participants for learning through
interactive games and songs.
What to expect in the pool
Because the age range is so large, so is temperament.
Starting swimming at 13 to 18 months means you'll still
be in a primary period of receptivity to water, making
it easier to learn how to swim—there will be less fear,
more cooperation, and a love of water. From 19 months
18
INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
HOW CHILDREN DEVELOP
19
to three years, growing independence, stubbornness,
and fear may necessitate clever game playing, humor, and
additional time for your child to learn new skills.
As most children in this age range are becoming
mobile, the early reflex kick is now replaced by a
learned and voluntary kick.
The benefits of swimming
Children of this age begin to be more aware of each
other and will copy other children, so for beginner and
intermediate swimmers this is a good time to start
swimming with other children. Through playing games
and using toys together in the pool, children develop
social skills such as sharing and communication.
CHILDREN FROM THREE TO FOUR YEARS
These children are real characters and make swimming
lessons lively with their burgeoning personalities, highly
verbal commentary, and vivid imaginations. They are fun
to interact with, and have their own particular likes and
dislikes as well as varying experiences with water.
What to expect in the pool
With physical sturdiness and growing coordination this
age group is very capable of swimming well. They can
produce a strong voluntary kick, and sit, climb, or stand
with little or no assistance. However, if they are just
starting to learn to swim at these ages, a good
percentage of children will have fears. Some of
these fears may be pronounced and almost
paralyzing, others slight and easily calmed.
Watching a peer who already swims can
bolster confidence, and children like to
show their peers and siblings what they
can do. Peer learning is extremely
appealing at these ages, and if you can
gather a group of friends and their
parents then you will see the benefits as
the children copy and encourage each
other. If one child kicks well she
can show off her vigorous splashes, while another might
be a great bubble blower, and yet a third may happily
put her face in the water.
Children begin to focus more, follow simple
directions, and link several skills together. Imaginative
play also distinguishes this age group and helps a
frightened, hesitant child, as well as a boisterous one.
Try using a circus, pirate, or spaceship theme in your
lesson-whatever motivates and encourages your child.
Children in this age group also like to work for
rewards. A simple high-five may do. Or let her collect
a pile of toys earned one at a time as a reward. Little
steps, reinforced and repeated again and again, begin to
instill a pattern of a desired behavior.
The benefits of swimming
Part of gaining trust involves respecting a child who
tells you that she doesn't want to put her face in the
water. Where you as a parent can help her transcend
that fear is by using play, games, and humor to help
her accomplish a submersion in small, non-
threatening stages. You may encounter
stalling techniques, but be
patient. Once they have
gone past the largest
hurdles, this age group
demonstrates great
competency.
20
INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
SIGNS TO STOP
Responding to your baby's needs, health, security, and comfort have been part of your
job description since the day he was born. Now you need to take your keen nurturing
and observational skills to the pool where your parental instincts will help you gauge the
flow of instruction and, most importantly, when to slow down or stop.
A TEAR-FREE ZONE
Make your swimming lessons a “tear-free zone.” Often
people who have witnessed aggressive swimming lessons
are astonished at the laughter, water confidence, and
lack of tears at our school.
There are several ways to keep the mood lighthearted
and the learning stress-free, including stopping, going
more slowly, or more accurately matching your child's
pace. You cannot do everything at once in baby
swimming, and trying to do so will only stress your
child and overwhelm him. Always speak calmly and
softly, and move gently—a rough tug, hard push, or
gruff, impatient tone will only lead to tears.
Remember the following points:
do not introduce any new skills until a child is ready
If you see signs of resistance or discomfort because
you've jumped ahead of your child's readiness, stop. Go
back to the previous skill or portion of the skill and do
not move on until your child is ready.
Don't do everything all at once. Instead, do a little
bit each lesson and gradually the skills will develop.
If you are stressed or frustrated, stop. Step back and
take a deep breath before starting afresh.
If your baby is uncomfortably cold, shivering, has
blue lips, or is tired or upset, stop immediately and exit
the pool.
Lessons should be happy, playful times together. There
is no one rushing or timing you, so go at your child's
pace and relax. If things aren't going smoothly, just play,
enjoy the water for the rest of the lesson, and start
again at the next session.
SIGNS TO STOP
21
SIGNS NOT TO GO IN
There are some days when it is important to stop
before you even begin. If your child is physically ill, for
example has a bad cold, heavy congestion, a stomach
virus with vomiting or diarrhea, a fever, an ear infection,
conjunctivitis, or anything contagious or infectious, stay
at home and rest until he is better. Not only are you
potentially exposing others to illness if you swim, but in
some of these cases your child's muscle strength, lung
capacity, and mood will be compromised by exercise
such as swimming. In other cases, your doctor will call a
temporary halt to lessons until a subsequent visit clears
your baby to resume activities. Otherwise, use your
good judgement and do not take your child swimming
until he returns to his normal activity levels and health.
WHEN NOT TO SUBMERGE YOUR CHILD
When first learning the cue for submersions (see
pp60-61), some babies may sputter, cough, or be a bit
surprised. Usually, their attention can be redirected with
a toy or different activity. However, if after a couple of
times your child is uncomfortable or begins resisting the
cue and submersion by arching his back, stop. Go back
to playing at the Water Pouring Station (see pp46-47)
and practicing the Cheek Dip (see p58). Once the Cheek
Dip has been slowly and successfully re-introduced,