Steven Shaw
Master
the
Art of
Swimming
Raise Your Performance with
the Alexander Technique

Master the Art of Swimming

Steven Shaw
Master the Art of Swimming
Raise Your Performance with the Alexander
Technique
COLLINS & BROWN

CONTENTS
Introduction: In Praise of Swimming
Steven's Story
1. The Shaw Method
2. Fun-da-mentals: Core Practices
3. Breaststroke With Ease
4. Better Your Backstroke
5. Learning to Crawl Again
6. A Shaw Way to Fly...
Final Word
Glossary
Index

IN PRAISE OF SWIMMING
An open mind, a swimming pool or stretch of calm water and this book
are all you need to realize your untapped potential for freedom of
movement with the Shaw Method. Prepare to embark on an amazing
journey of self-discovery. In the rhythmic movements of swimming, free
from the downward pressure of gravity, you can discover the ultimate
form of meditation. Swimming is the supreme form of exercise for mind,
body and spirit – as well as improving flexibility and tone it will also
boost your self-esteem and sense of well-being. Whatever challenges you
face in life, swimming always helps: when you are stressed it relaxes you,
when you are exhausted it revitalizes you, and when your muscles are stiff
it releases them. Forget Prozac – the remedy is in H20!
Exercise fads come and go, but swimming always remains at the top of
the popularity charts. The psychological benefits of immersion, rather
than the knowledge that swimming is good for joints and muscles, keep
millions of people switched on to swimming. It is an ideal antidote to our
pressured lives, offering a rare opportunity to rejuvenate the body while
allowing the mind to rest.
The verb 'to swim' is defined as 'the ability to propel oneself through
water', whereas the noun ‘swimming' is generally defined as 'a
competitive sport'. The competitive perspective is so pervasive that even
the Oxford English Dictionary describes swimming purely in terms of
being a sport. This attitude is extremely limiting. As long as you gauge
your performance in the water by the number of laps you swim or
whether you arrive at the end of the pool before the next person, there is
little chance of discovering the riches water has to offer.

It is, however, important to acknowledge that a competitive outlook has
been vital to the remarkable evolution of swimming. Without the
motivation to go faster, human beings would probably still swim like
other land-based mammals, using what is essentially a form of walking.
Competition has led us to develop four ingenious ways of moving through
the water: breaststroke, backstroke, front crawl and butterfly. Man's
ability to swim well also derives from certain unique physical
characteristics. Only human babies, born with subcutaneous fat, can float
and swim from birth. Of all primates, only humans have a descended
larynx, allowing us to easily take in air through the mouth when
swimming.
What differentiates the approach outlined here from others is that it
draws on the Alexander Technique. The Technique's central idea is that
the relationship between head, neck and back determines the quality of
the body's overall coordination. When the neck is free and the head
balances lightly at the top of the spine we are able to function more
efficiently; when it is tense and the vertebrae are compressed our
functioning is adversely affected. My years of experience have confirmed
that the head-neck-back relationship is of utmost importance and that
improving this relationship is the single most significant factor affecting
swimming performance.
We are now entering a new phase in the evolution of swimming. This
book will help you transcend the competitive mindset and recraft each
stroke to promote the optimum use of the self. This approach to
swimming is closer to a martial art than a competitive sport – winning or
losing are mere distractions from an ongoing journey towards self-
mastery. Water is an ideal environment for self-development; it amplifies
psychophysical patterns, providing the opportunity to become aware of
how thoughts affect quality of movement. Swimming is unlike any other
physical activity: apart from needing to coordinate the whole body in the
horizontal plane, you also have to be in tune with the water. If you try
hard and apply too much effort you will flounder; swimming gracefully is
more about letting go and going with the flow than it is about pushing
yourself.
To the evolved or enlightened swimmer, there are a number of ways of
measuring one's performance. Speed is just one indicator, but no more
significant than, for example, the distance travelled per stroke or the
relative energy expended. A master of swimming never compromises a
good body form in the quest for speed – hunching the shoulders in
breaststroke reduces drag but is unacceptable as it has a detrimental
effect on body alignment. This is not to say that swimming in a more
mindful way reduces speed; on the contrary with the Shaw Method most
people are able to swim considerably faster and further than they ever
thought possible. This new approach limits the energy expended on non-
propulsive movements, gaining greater purchase on the water and so
realizing maximum benefit from precious time in the water.
If you are on the look out for a training manual that provides elaborate
tables telling you how far and fast to swim and how much rest to take
between each set, look elsewhere. There are countless 'get fit' swimming
books and websites that will give you this type of information. If you are
looking for something more reflective that encourages you to pause,
rethink your relationship with the water and explore each stroke in depth,
read on. Instead of mindlessly swimming lap after lap, you will learn to
pay attention to the process of swimming and develop the quality of the
experience. This learning goes far beyond the pool, providing you with a
powerful new model with which to approach any activity.
Taking the plunge into learning the art of swimming may seem somewhat
daunting, particularly for those with a more sedentary lifestyle. You may
feel self-conscious about your size and the prospect of being seen in
public in a swimming costume. However, having decided to embark on a
fitness programme it is far better to begin in the pool where the effects of
buoyancy significantly reduce the risks of injuring weight-bearing joints.
More regular swimmers may feel self conscious about practising new
strokes or performing unusual looking practices. Take comfort from the
fact only those swimmers straining their necks to keep their faces out of
the water will be watching. With any luck your progress will inspire them
to join int
to join iii.

Steven's Story
My earliest memories of swimming are of splashing around in the local
open-air lido where I spent much of my leisure time. The pool never
seemed to lose its magical appeal. During the summer months, the
anticipation was often overwhelming. I have vivid memories of one
scorching day, standing impatiently in what was surely the longest queue
ever. The interminable wait added to my sense of excitement and I can
remember my heart racing when my nose picked up the sweet scent of
chlorine. When we finally arrived at the turnstiles, I had to be restrained
from running ahead. I always wore my trunks under my trousers to avoid
wasting precious time.
Until the age of eight I spent my time at the children's pool, a large
semi-circular construction where water streamed from the mouths of two
lion statues. The pool had a gradual, beach-style entrance with sloping
sides - great fun to run in and out of when the lifeguards weren't
watching! We picnicked on the grassy banks surrounding the pool and
after the compulsory hour's wait to ensure digestion we raced back to the
pool for more aquatic fun. The lido was much more than a pool: it was a
place to hang out with friends and family.
I was a clumsy child and the pool was one of the few places I felt safe
to explore movement without injuring myself. I spent hours inventing
pool games. My favourite was 'The Torpedo'. The torpedo lay face down
in the water and the launcher got hold of his feet and pushed him
forward; whoever got the farthest was the winner. During my experience
as the torpedo I discovered that by tucking in my chin and breathing out
slowly I would travel further, that is as long as the launcher was any good.
Handstands and underwater cartwheels were also great fun.
In hindsight, these early experiences were invaluable for cultivating a
feeling of confidence and ease in the water. It was only when I started
teaching adults that I began to appreciate the value of simply exploring
the water.
Peer pressure and the lure of deeper water led me to the conclusion
that it was time to learn to swim 'properly', so I enrolled at a local
swimming class. The teacher was from the old school of teaching and if a
child held back he would be forced in. The experience of witnessing these
scenes made a strong impression on me. I can vividly remember the
atmosphere of fear at the school and can recall thinking that there must
be a better way to teach.
Time to get serious about swimming
I graduated from the local swimming school to the Mermaids and Marlins
swimming club, and started to train and compete. The club had some
international-level swimmers and it was inspirational to train alongside
them. It was not long before I was training for four hours a day, squeezed
in before and after school. Our coach drove us hard, an approach which
sometimes verged on bullying. One one occasion he caught me pulling a
lane rope along and punished me with a painful 1,500 metres of butterfly,
which put me off the stroke for years.
I pushed myself to the limit, naively believing his axiom that ‘Training
is suffering; after suffering comes results.' Yet I never got beyond county
level. Despite being fit and strong, my technique let me down.
For the most part, my training consisted of swimming lap after lap,
and I would only occasionally get feedback from my coach. During these
rare sessions he analysed my stroke and this was always useful. I yearned
to swim with more finesse instead of thoughtlessly thrashing up and
down the pool. I read numerous technique manuals, but although these
were interesting they did not provide me with the tools to fundamentally
change my way of swimming.
I achieved my best times in the breaststroke and like most competitive
breaststrokers I cultivated a pattern of hunching my shoulders to achieve
maximum streamlining. Looking back at photographs of myself during
this period, it is clear that my habit of rounding my shoulders when on
dry land was shaped during this period. I was oblivious to the link
between the way I used my body in and out of the water.
By the age of seventeen, I was burnt out. Without success to spur me
on, I no longer enjoyed training and to cap it all my neck and upper back
felt sore. The feeling of freedom of movement that attracted me to
swimming in the first place had disappeared. I quit swimming and vowed
never to return. Giving up was a tremendous liberation: instead of
spending hours every week training and travelling to and from the pool, I
was able to develop a life beyond swimming.
The Alexander Technique
I became interested in political theory and went to study Philosophy and
Politics at Manchester University, in England. I was particularly
interested in exploring the connection between thought and action.
Like many students, I did very little physical activity, and my poor
posture combined with the pressure of exams caused my back and neck
to deteriorate. I tried massage, osteopathy and acupuncture, which
temporarily alleviated the discomfort but did not bring lasting relief. A
friend suggested that I try the Alexander Technique (AT), a system of
postural re-education. He explained that it addresses the root causes of
habitual patterns. I was sceptical but my friend was clearly benefiting
from it – he moved with a new sense of poise and appeared to be more at
ease with himself.
Eventually I signed up for a series of weekly private lessons. They
were no immediate panacea. The lessons were challenging and it was
several months before I noticed any changes. We explored simple
activities such as standing and walking. The teacher demonstrated
Primary Control - a dynamic relationship between the head, neck and
back, which is at the core of the Alexander approach. I came to the
daunting realization that most of the time I was completely oblivious to
the way I moved and functioned. However, what was liberating about
these early lessons (in contrast to my swimming training) was that I
never felt criticized or judged. My teacher simply encouraged me to direct
my attention away from trying to do the right thing and instead towards
working on eliminating bad habits. It was the cumulative effect of letting
my neck be free so that my back lengthened and widened, and the notion
of taking responsibility for my own condition, which inspired me to train
further in the Technique.
In 1987 I began a three-year Alexander Technique teacher-training
course in Tel Aviv. In Israel the AT is a widely accepted method for re-
educating the body, and is a part of basic training for military pilots. The
head of training at the school, Zeev Tadmore, came from a sporting and
martial arts background.
A central element of AT training is that before working with others
you are expected to employ the principles of the AT yourself. The
psychophysical state in which I arrived at the school was not a good one.
My posture was still poor, and my shoulders and upper back constantly
ached. My teacher was always positive and created a supportive and
nurturing environment. He encouraged me to investigate the sources of
my poor alignment, which included swimming.
During my time in Israel I worked as a lifeguard, which gave me the
opportunity to swim again. After an absence of five years it was good to
reconnect with the water; however, a familiar aching sensation in my
neck confirmed that my poor posture and what the AT describes as
‘misuse' of the body were linked to my years of competitive training. The
focus in those years had been purely on speed with little regard for my
overall well-being.
My inability to notice the build-up of tension in my body when
swimming, despite being an AT student, was particularly distressing. This
lack of awareness was hard to comprehend, but my teacher explained
that habitual patterns of behaviour normally feel right and to change
them frequently feels wrong. For me, the tension was so familiar that it
felt natural, whereas swimming without strain felt odd and even
incorrect. As soon as I got into the water my old, habitual ways of
swimming returned: in breaststroke my shoulders ended up by my ears
and despite attempting to swim slowly and mindfully, I couldn't stop
myself from racing whenever a fast swimmer came near me. I began to
realize that the postural patterns I had developed in the water were
merely symptoms of a much more complex problem which concerned my
whole approach to swimming.
Gradually, as my body awareness developed, I began to move more
easily through the water. It was still difficult to get into the pool without a
fixed goal, however, such as completing a certain number of lengths in a
given time. But by controlling my tendency to rush, in all aspects of my
life as well as in the water, I was able to alter the way I swam. I began to
appreciate that water offered both a sense of stillness and a unique
opportunity to explore freedom of movement.
When I began exploring my relationship with water, I was surprised
by the variety and intensity of surfacing memories. Keeping a journal
covering the content of my practice sessions and related thoughts and
feelings helped me absorb the significance of this process and provided a
useful record of my journey. I now encourage my pupils to keep a similar
record whilst the experiences are still fresh in their mind, which many
find similarly helpful.
Working with others
Apart from improving my own relationship with the water during this
time, my job as a lifeguard gave me ample opportunity to observe others
swimming. I was shocked by the number of people who swam with their
heads held up out of the water, and from my new Alexander perspective
could now see how much neck strain this was causing. I began to notice
those who swam in a graceful, almost effortless way, allowing the head
and neck to move freely in and out of the water. I became increasingly
aware that the principal elements that set a good swimmer apart lay in
the relationship between the head, neck and back. Poorer swimmers
pulled their heads back and fixed their neck muscles.
A job at a holiday resort gave me a chance to discover more about
people's early experiences of swimming. I was struck by the number of
adults who recalled negative incidents. They almost always reported that
their teachers, like mine, had encouraged them to apply more effort in
order to swim better. Together with my then wife Limor, also an AT
trainee, I began to explore ways of using hands-on guidance to help them
feel more comfortable in the water. Initially I worked mainly with fearful
swimmers, but found that competent swimmers also benefited from this
approach.
In 1992, a year after completing the AT teacher training, I returned to
the UK and began teaching the Technique in London. I also completed a
couple of swimming teacher courses at the local pool. I enjoyed the
courses greatly, but was very surprised that you were not required to
swim and were not allowed to teach from within the water.
Through conversations with my AT pupils I found that many of them
swam with their faces out of the water so I decided to offer ‘water
confidence' lessons and within a relatively short time I was teaching a
range of abilities. I learned a great deal through my interaction with these
pupils. I could see that the combination of my competitive swimming
experience and the Alexander training was of enormous value.
In 1994, a pupil who was to have a major impact on my work booked a
series of swimming lessons. Armand D'Angour was in his mid-30s and
wanted to overcome a fear of water. He had tried to learn to swim several
times, but with little success. He had taken lessons in the Alexander
Technique and was intrigued by the prospect of applying AT principles to
swimming. The difference between his lessons with me and all his
previous instruction was the fact that I was successfully able to redirect
his attention and instead of fighting the water he learned to enjoy it.
Armand quickly learnt to swim with confidence and ease. He was
delighted with his progress and we decided to write a book together to
inspire others to learn to swim.
In 1996, The Art of Swimming: a New Direction with the Alexander
Technique was published by Ashgrove Press, offering a clear alternative
to the traditional model of swimming. It was the first book written from
an Alexander Technique standpoint to make an in-depth philosophical
investigation into a sporting activity. It challenged the popular belief that
swimming is always beneficial, illustrating how a defective style can do
more harm than good. It urged people to stop striving to swim faster and
further and start swimming in a more mindful way. The book received an
unexpected level of media attention and became a bestseller in its field.
The Shaw Method
The Art of Swimming not only had an impact on swimmers far and wide,
it also dramatically affected my life. Overnight, the demand for lessons
became overwhelming. I wanted to establish a teacher-training
programme, but was hesitant to define my way of teaching as a method
because I feared this would hinder the flexibility and intuitive nature of
the teaching process. However, without a clearly defined and structured
teaching model the approach could not be passed on to other teachers,
severely limiting its potential growth. So, after much deliberation, I began
to formalize the teaching as the Shaw Method of Swimming. Looking
back, this was a seminal moment in the development of the work and had
a very positive impact on both my teaching and swimming.
Although I had been endeavouring to apply Alexander Technique
principles to swimming, and had discovered new ways of guiding and
supporting people in the water, the work was still in its infancy. It had not
yet been formulated as a comprehensive teaching method.
Using a camcorder, I investigated my own swimming style to find out
whether I was moving in a way that promoted the best possible use of
myself. I remembered that Alexander had gone through a similar process
himself with the use of mirrors. Seeing myself swim for the first time was
quite an alarming and humbling experience. My head was much higher
than I thought it ought to be and although my movement looked fluent,
my arm and leg actions were not symmetrical. I concluded that my
swimming style required a complete overhaul.
From my AT experience I knew that to try and eliminate faults whilst
performing the full stroke was unlikely to be successful, as the stimulus to
move in habitual ways would just be too strong. I reasoned that the best
course of action was to separate out the core elements of each stroke and
work on them in isolation – both in the water and on dry land. Hopefully
this would override strongly ingrained patterns and offer a real possibility
of producing a new way of moving. The approach worked and proved to
be a powerful way of rebuilding my strokes; it also produced positive side
effects, altering the way I felt and moved both in and out of the pool.
Having found a way of fundamentally changing my swimming technique,
I now had the beginnings of a new model with which to teach others.

THE SHAW METHOD
'The Shaw Method of Swimming offers me an assisted passage
through the water - assisted that is, by the water itself.'
Jane-Anne Purdy, registered Shaw Method teacher

Although swimming is one of the most popular forms of
exercise, most people do not swim well enough to really benefit
from the time they spend in the water, and many have
developed styles that strain their joints. The underlying goals of
speed and competition at the heart of conventional swimming
instruction often impede the acquisition of vital skills. Few are
able to swim continuously for 20 minutes – which is generally
considered the minimum time to gain cardiovascular benefit.
Learning the Shaw Method
If you have picked up this book you are probably fed up with
thrashing around in the pool or bored with counting laps. Let
the Shaw Method start a new era in your relationship with
water.
This chapter explains the key principles of the Shaw Method
of Swimming and dispels myths and fallacies. Chapter 2 guides
you though a series of practices that teach the core elements of
the Method. These preliminary practices may appear too
pedestrian for more accomplished swimmers. However, the
basics of awareness, direction and balance are at the heart of a
good stroke and must be mastered to develop the repertoire of
aquatic skills required for a healthier and more pleasurable style
of swimming.
Chapters 3-6 guide you though a series of easy-to-follow,
progressive practices on land and in the water, which teach my
unique formula for developing the four strokes: front crawl,
breaststroke, back crawl and butterfly. You will discover that a
non-propulsive movement precedes every propulsive
movement. These chapters also include accounts of each
stroke's relative health benefits, outlining not only what to do
but, just as importantly, what to avoid. It is beneficial to work
through these with a partner as well as by yourself.
This book is not a 'quick fix' to your aquatic woes; rather it
points the way towards a more mindful and conscious
relationship with water. Goals such as improving cardiovascular
fitness must be temporarily set aside until you have established
a firm foundation for your swimming strokes. Thereafter you
will be in a position to obtain greater health and fitness benefits
from your time in the water.
The key to success is cultivating a positive, open approach to
learning. Your level of skill or expertise in the water when you
begin this journey is immaterial. Free yourself from the
pressure of trying to perform the practices 'correctly' and use
them to start exploring the unknown. I have found that those
most successful at mastering the art of swimming posses the
ability to stop, listen and be patient.
When you flick through this book, the sheer number of
practices may overwhelm you. Don't follow them mechanically
they are there to encourage you to experiment with the way
you think and move, heighten your awareness and inspire
creativity. It is unnecessary to memorize exact sequences or
the finer points of a particular practice; a deeper understanding
will come with time. Initially, it is important to grasp the main
purpose of a practice and how it may apply to you.
It is futile to be overly concerned with stroke mechanics
before you feel at home in the water. Learn to trust the water
and allow it to support you instead of struggling against it. This
will completely transform the experience of swimming. This
may sound obvious, yet most swimmers find it hard to truly
relax in the water.
Swimming with the Alexander Technique
The Shaw Method is a creative step-by-step approach that has
helped thousands of people of all ages and abilities transform
their experience of swimming. In contrast with the majority of
teachers who adopt a competitive perspective, the Shaw
Method draws its inspiration from F.M Alexander's powerful
technique for rediscovering natural balance and poise. Brief
descriptions of Alexander's principles follow. Please thoroughly
acquaint yourself with them as they are used throughout this
book.
Use – A term to describe a person's psychophysical interaction
with their environment. Swimming with good use involves
moving through the water in a way that promotes good
alignment with minimal physical or mental strain.
Primary Control – For Alexander the quality of the head-neck-
back relationship was the single most important factor affecting
overall use. Paying attention to form and allowing the head to
lead the rest of the body is the best way to resolve specific
stroke faults.
Giving directions – The ability to project a series of
constructive thoughts that promote lengthening and widening.
In swimming to counter the tendency of pulling the arms
backwards it is useful to direct your attention to holding the
water and moving the torso forward.
Kinaesthetic awareness The ability to sense the position,
orientation and movement of the body. Feedback from the
water enhances the development of body awareness.
End Gaining – Striving for results without attending to
process. Swimming for fitness without considering technique
often leads to strain and injury.
Inhibition – Creating the space for choice between stimulus
and reaction. To counter the undesirable habit of taking a big
breath before putting the face in the water it is necessary to
inhibit this automatic response before consciously inhaling.
Faulty sensory appreciation – Good use requires accurate
kinaesthetic awareness. Force of habit and a lack of conscious
control undermine this ability leading to faulty sensory
appreciation. If you are accustomed to an uneven breaststroke
leg action a symmetrical leg action is likely to feel wrong.
Thinking in Activity – Swimming in an unthinking way
reduces the ability to feel and respond to water, a mindful
approach enables you to become more responsive to the effects
of buoyancy and resistance and thereby more in tune with the
water.
Non-doing – The conscious ability to leave oneself alone and
avoid automatic responses. It is preferable to consciously let go
and allow the water to support you as opposed to trying to hold
yourself up.
Startle response – An automatic response to an unexpected,
sudden stimulus, our head reflexively moves back and down,
compressing the neck and stressing the rest of the body. While
the startle response is a natural reaction to fear, it is
inappropriate in the water and has a detrimental affect on the
ability to swim comfortably. Learning to free the neck and
allowing our back its full length and width promotes calmness
and ease in the water.
The power of habit
I am often taken aback by some people's unrealistic
expectations of the learning process. Swimming habits develop
over many years and it is naive to expect an instant
transformation. Tai chi masters consider that it takes around
500 repetitions to learn a new movement and 5,000 to re-
pattern an old one.
Everyone has a tendency to return to habitual patterns in the
water. The sooner you learn to recognize these patterns, the
quicker you can start the process of changing them. Don't give
yourself a hard time when you revert to your old ways and
don't expect instant results; you will make progress.
Because our neuromuscular system is designed to work in
concert with gravity you may find some of the instructions
counterintuitive. To swim effectively you really have to use your
brain; following your instincts and doing what comes naturally
is unlikely to produce good results.
Over-breathing is one of the most common and unhelpful
aquatic habits. Most people unnecessarily and automatically
swallow excessive quantities of air just before submerging their
faces. They are oblivious to this pattern. Do you do this? Can
you choose a more appropriate course of action and inhale
passively? Unless you concentrate, you are likely to slip back
into the unconscious pattern.
The power of an ingrained habit also makes it more difficult
to correct stroke faults than you might envisage. Because the
pattern has been repeated so many times, it feels normal and
comfortable. Also, the root cause of a particular pattern may be
far from obvious, as the following example from my own
experience indicates.
On seeing footage of my front crawl, I was concerned to note
that my left and right above-water arm actions were different. I
could see that my left hand twisted as it entered the water,
which surprised me as I am left-handed and expected to have
more control with the left hand than the right. For several
months, I focused attention on my left arm to rectify this, but
disappointingly the action remained virtually unchanged. It was
only when someone pointed out that my left arm looked more
effective underwater that I began to unravel this puzzle. I
finally grasped the fact that the over-rotation of my left arm
resulted from a less than effective underwater action of the
right arm. This experience taught me that the process of
remedying a particular stroke fault involves three essential
stages: an awareness of what is actually happening, an
accurate appreciation of the root cause of the difficulty, and a
clear psychophysical strategy for change.
Stillness and movement
Learning the art of swimming requires a major shift in your
approach to movement in water and on land. Stillness, and
being in the moment, are the starting points for all conscious
movement. To perform a sequence of movements accurately, it
is necessary to have a clear idea of the desired objective. Pause
and think before launching into any of the practices: you are
more likely to achieve positive results with appropriate
preparation. Many people find it extremely useful to visualize a
sequence of movements, at the correct pace, before
proceeding.
When pupils perform a movement incorrectly, I ask them to
describe what they were attempting to do. This often reveals
that they were either performing the wrong action or were
simply not thinking at all. Allowing the mind to wander, as
Alexander pointed out, is a major impediment to developing
body awareness.
Where to swim
It is important to select a suitable environment in which to
practise. Ideally, this should be a warm pool with a large area
of shallow water. Try to avoid crowded, deep or cold pools. A
teaching pool at the local leisure centre may be a good option.
If you cannot get regular access to an ideal environment, make
the best of what is available. The great thing about the
practices in this book is that they do not require a large area of
water. Working within a smaller area can be an advantage; you
are required to stop more often, helping you to pay attention
moment to moment.
Pool temperature is potentially one of the most challenging
issues for anyone learning the Shaw Method. An average pool is
27-29°C (80–84°F), which feels comfortable if you are
swimming laps, but if you are less confident or working through
some of the less energetic sequences in this book, it can feel
very chilly. If you start to feel too cold, include some more
vigorous movements or shorten the session. Alternatively, you
could wear a swimming cap as you lose around 30 per cent of
your body heat from the top of your head; if you are
particularly susceptible to the cold, why not try a lightweight
thermal swimming top.
The Art of Swimming on dry land
For many of the water-based practices, there are equivalent
ones to do on dry land. These are an integral part of the Shaw
Method and should not be viewed as unnecessary or
superfluous to the process of swimming. They help establish
and reinforce new patterns of movement in preparation for
swimming, developing your kinaesthetic awareness and sense
of balance and control. You may initially find it hard to relate
the land practices (which for the most part are performed
upright) to swimming movements, but with regular repetition
the link will become clearer.
Many pupils are surprised to find that seemingly complex
movements are more easily absorbed and integrated into their
swimming through regular land work. Some people feel self-
conscious about performing swimming movements out of the
water. If your friends or family think you have a screw loose,
tell them it is a new martial art! Spend just a few minutes a day
and it will not be long before you start reaping the benefits.
Our swimming habits can be so strong that it is often easier
to change the tone and quality of the movements simply by
stepping out of the water. The effects of buoyancy and
resistance obviously make working on land a very different
experience to working in water. However, on land you can
develop the desired sequences of movements and repeat them
often enough for them to feel familiar.
Practice sessions
Initially, try to spend 20-30 minutes on each session. When
you are more experienced, you will be able to centre your
attention for longer periods. Work on no more than four new
practices in any one session. As discussed earlier, even the
most elementary practices take a while to master, and until the
new pattern of movement is firmly established the old, habitual
one is likely to creep back. Avoid the temptation to swim the
full stroke during the early stages, as this is likely to reinforce
old patterns and leave you confused.
Working with a partner
Compared to other health and fitness pursuits, swimming can
feel quite solitary. For some this provides the privacy that they
lack in other parts of their lives; others may welcome the
opportunity to share the experience.
In the absence of a Shaw Method teacher, partner work is
excellent for developing awareness, with a great deal to be
learned through mutual observation and feedback. You may be
surprised by how quickly your observation skills grow. Be
sensitive towards your partner and always give constructive
feedback without overly focusing on what you think he or she is
doing wrong.
Myths about swimming and fitness
It is not necessarily the case that practice makes perfect – it
can make things worse. Many regular swimmers rehearse the
same mistakes; bad habits become more ingrained and harder
to unlearn. It is imperative to practise in a constructive way and
think about the quality of movement.
Believing that if something does not work at first you should
try harder is often a formula for failure rather than success. It is
more productive to approach swimming with a spirit of
exploration.
You do not need to wear yourself out in order to have a
worthwhile workout. A healthy approach to fitness requires
good body alignment and a good technique. Many people
underestimate the importance of this and think they can
improve their swimming by just getting fitter. What usually
happens is that they get more efficient at injuring themselves!
Put aerobic fitness objectives to one side until you have
established a healthy way of swimming.
Some people are under the impression that they do not need
to think about the way they swim. They use swimming as a way
of switching off and let their minds wander. However, if you do
not pay attention to the way you are swimming you are not
only more likely to injure yourself, but your mind is more likely
to drift to things that bother you. Paying attention to what you
are doing is a better way of switching off, as it clears the mind
of its usual chatter.

FUN-DA-MENTALS:
CORE PRACTICES
'If I had six hours to chop down a tree I would spend the first
four hours sharpening the axe.' Abraham Lincoln

Back to basics
The title of this chapter, `Fun-da-mentals', emphasizes the fact
that it is more fun to be imaginative and mindful in the water
than to switch off and swim on automatic pilot. This section
guides you through a series of foundation practices that will
help you to explore and understand the physics of swimming,
particularly the effects of buoyancy and resistance. If you are
an accomplished swimmer, do not think that you can skip this
section. Whatever your ability, you have to go 'back to basics'.
In order to develop a way of swimming that promotes the best
possible 'use' of the body, as the Alexander Technique describes
it, you must have a wide repertoire of skills. Although many of
these skills can be cultivated during the process of re-learning
the four strokes, they are more effectively assimilated without
the distraction of trying to get from one end of the pool to the
other.
Here is an opportunity to develop a new relationship with the
water. The practices in this chapter enhance awareness of the
body, poise and balance, enabling you to stop struggling
against the water and start working with it. They not only offer
a solid base for swimming more effectively but are also
beneficial in themselves, improving overall poise and balance on
dry land.
Buoyancy
On land, gravitational force exerts a downward pressure on our
bodies, which causes compression of weight-bearing joints
including the spine, ankles, knees and hips. On entering the
water, we are instantly liberated from these downward
pressures because water counteracts the effect of gravity.
When the body is submerged, the effects of buoyancy