THE MASTERS ATHLETE SERIES
MASTERING
SWIMMING
Your guide for fitness, training, and competition

JIM MONTGOMERY MO CHAMBERS
Foreword by Rowdy Gaines

Inside of cover is intentionally left blank.

Mastering
Swimming
Jim Montgomery
Mo Chambers
G
Human Kinetics

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Montgomery, Jim, 1955-
Mastering swimming / Jim Montgomery, Mo Chambers.
p. cm. — (The masters athlete series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-7453-7 (soft cover)
ISBN-10: 0-7360-7453-8 (soft cover)
1. Swimming. I. Chambers, Mo (Maureen), 1958- II. Title.
GV837.M63 2009
797.2'1—dc22
2008035439
ISBN-10: 0-7360-7453-8 (Print)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-7453-7 (Print)
ISBN-10: 0-7360-8169-0 (Adobe PDF)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8169-6 (Adobe PDF)
Copyright © 2009 by Jim Montgomery and Maureen Chambers
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
xerography, photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is
forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.
The Web addresses cited in this text were current as of August 2008, unless otherwise noted.
Acquisitions Editor: Tom Heine; Developmental Editor: Anne Hall; Assistant Editor: Cory Weber;
Copyeditor: Joy Wotherspoon; Proofreader: Anne Rogers; Indexer: Ann Truesdale; Permission
Manager: Martha Gullo; Graphic Designer: Joe Buck; Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg;
Photographer (cover): © EyeWire; Photographer (interior): James Wiseman, unless otherwise
noted; Photo Asset Manager: Laura Fitch; Visual Production Assistant: Joyce Brumfield; Photo
Office Assistant: Jason Allen; Printer: United Graphics
We thank the Southern Methodist University in Dallas for assistance in providing the location for
the photo shoot for this book.
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book
excerpts can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human
Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.HumanKinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia: Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
North Shore City
Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz

To the many masters swimmers who have the
courage to show up at our workouts and bring
the passion to give their best effort. You have been
our inspiration.
iii

iv
Foreword vii
Preface ix
Acknowledgments xiii
Contents
Part I Taking the Plunge
1
Chapter 1 Start With a Vision, Train With a Plan
.3
Chapter 2 Set the Stage for Success
11
......
Chapter 3 Develop Your Water Sense . . . ........19
Part II Fine-Tuning Your Strokes
29
Chapter 4 Freestyle
..31
Chapter 5 Backstroke
43
Chapter 6 Butterfly.
51
Chapter 7
Breaststroke.
61
Chapter 8 Starts, Turns, and Finishes.
71

Part III Conditioning for Success
93
Chapter 9 Workout Essentials .
..95
Chapter 10 Pool Workouts
105
Chapter 11 Dry-Land Training.
125
Chapter 12 Open-Water Training
141
Chapter 13 Make Your Plan for Success
153
Part IV Competition
Chapter 14 Competing in Pool Events.
169
171
Chapter 15 Competing in Open Water . . . .......183
Appendix 201
Bibliography 203
Index 204
About the Authors 209

This page intentionally left blank.

Foreword
T
he first time I met Jim Montgomery, one of my heroes in the sport of swim-
ming, I broke a world record with him. How's that for an introduction?
In 1978 I made my first national team for the World Championships, and
one of the events I swam was the 400 freestyle relay. Jim was on that relay team
with me. I had been swimming competitively for only about two years. Jim, of
course, was coming off the 1976 Olympic team as one of their stars. We won
the gold at the World Championships and smashed the world record.
I will never forget the encouragement Jim gave me as we prepared for that
event. I admired his ability to keep his emotions on an even keel, just before
competing on the world stage. He never got too high or too low. He was
approaching the end of his competitive career, and before he retired I wanted
to bottle the wealth of knowledge he had. I took advantage of his advice and
will be forever grateful to him.
What a privilege it is for me to contribute to this book that Jim and Mo Chambers
have so masterfully written. Although I don't know Mo as well as Jim, she is a
talented masters coach in her own right—as well as a skilled wordsmith known
throughout the swimming community. She was working as a software engineer
for a large Silicon Valley firm when, at age 30, she decided to take a job teach-
ing swimming to a group of eager adults. This “side job” soon became her
all-consuming passion, and would eventually lead to her being named United
States Masters Swimming coach of the year.
It's all in this book—the combined wisdom of two great masters coaches.
In Mo's case it is apparent why, upon taking the helm of the Mountain View
Masters Swim Club, it grew from an organization of 30 members to more than
350 swimmers. In Jim's case it's not surprising that he may now be better known
as a masters swimming expert than as a great Olympian. He was perhaps the
first Olympic swimmer upon leaving the elite ranks to generously pass on his
trade secrets to ordinary masters swimmers; he went on to found what is now
one of the largest masters teams in the country—Dallas Aquatic Masters—which
maintains a strong emphasis on swimming for fitness for a lifetime.
In this book Mo and Jim show how to prepare for swimming success at any
level, whether it's showing a lap swimmer how to execute her first flip turn or
teaching a former high school star the strategies for his first open-water com-
petition. The first chapter epitomizes Jim and Mo's shared training philosophy:
Start with a vision, train with a plan. No matter what your eventual swimming
goals are, the process Jim followed to win Olympic gold is now available to all
of us. The book progresses to teach proper technique for all four strokes, the
foundation for all swimming success. Also included are helpful tips on breath
and balance, dry-land training, and planning workouts.
vii

viii Foreword
Jim won the same three events I won in 1984 (and he added a bronze in the
200). After I finished my last event, I reflected on the fact that it was such an
honor to follow in the footsteps of some of the greatest freestylers of all time:
Johnny Weissmuller, Don Schollander, and Jim Montgomery. It is rare to be able
to take advantage of that greatness in order to reach your personal swimming
goals. That is now possible with this wonderful book.
I can't wait to share this fantastic piece of work with all my fellow masters
swimmers . . . and for that matter, all of my swimmer friends!
-Rowdy Gaines, three-time Olympic gold medalist

Preface
I
t's 1969. The water in the Madison East High School pool is churning with
the steady flow of the local swim team. In the center lanes, the veterans of
the sport swim stroke for stroke with intensity and purpose. Coach Pat Barry
pensively keeps his eyes on his charges. He scans across the lanes until his
eyes stop at the far end of the pool: lane 6, home to the swimmers who lack
the focus and the work ethic of team leaders. They are goofing around. There,
in the center of the action, is Jim Montgomery.
Coach Barry asked Jim to get out of the pool. Holding up Jim's hand, he
said, "Jim, you have more talent in this little pinkie than the rest of the swim-
mers in the whole pool have combined! You have so much potential—if you
would just use it!” This defining moment sent Jim on a journey that to this day
has affected his lifelong goals and career. This was when Jim realized that his
potential was limitless.
With the help of first Coach Barry, then later college coach Doc Counsilman
and club coach Jack Pettinger, Jim created a vision of becoming an Olympic
gold medalist. Seven years later, in the 1976 Montreal Olympics, Jim became the
first person to break the 50-second barrier in the 100-meter freestyle, winning
the gold medal and anchoring two relays for two additional gold medals.
How did Jim go from goofing off in lane 6 to being the best swimmer in
the world in just seven years? Jim was successful because he had incredible
commitment to his vision and a training plan that worked for him. Now Jim
Montgomery has come together with Mo Chambers with a vision to create a
book specifically for adult swimmers who want to improve their strokes, add
variety and purpose to their training, or learn more about this lifelong sport.
With a combined total of over 50 years of coaching adult swimmers, Jim and
Mo have had the opportunity to meet, teach, and watch the improvement of
thousands of adult swimmers who range in age from their teens to their nineties,
and in skill from rookies to collegiate champions, triathletes, fitness swimmers,
and competition-bound masters swimmers. Once immersed, all these athletes
discovered that swimming is far more than doing lap after lap staring at a black
line on the bottom of the pool. It is a medley of strokes to learn and perfect. It
is an infinite number of training sets and drills designed to increase efficiency
and improve fitness. It is a core-based, full-body exercise. The trip up and down
the pool is a journey to a truly balanced and complete level of fitness.
Jim and Mo have written Mastering Swimming to guide your discovery of the
fun and rewards that keep swimmers in the water throughout their adult lives. This
book is for all adult swimmers, whether they swim on their own time in a private
ix

X Preface
pool or public lap-swim program or they prefer the camaraderie of a structured
adult setting like a masters program. Often misunderstood, masters programs
are open to all adult swimmers regardless of their experience or goals. In fact,
the vast majority of masters swimmers participate purely for fitness and stress
relief; only a small percentage choose to compete. Regardless of your chosen
venue, Jim and Mo want to improve your experience with this comprehensive
guide to adult swimming.
Like in Jim's story, your journey will begin with setting goals. Your goals need
not be Olympic sized—they can be as simple as learning a flip turn or increasing
your stroke length. On the other hand, you may be dreaming bigger, thinking of
competing in a pool meet or open-water event. Part I of this book, Taking the
Plunge, guides you in goal setting and motivation. Your training plan must be
flexible enough to accommodate the various responsibilities of the rest of your
life. Do you train better on your own or in a group? How should you adjust your
training for an injury or illness? Jim and Mo provide tips for staying on track
throughout all the bumps in the road.
A successful swimming experience begins with an understanding of body
balance, relaxed breathing, and efficient stroke technique. Part II of this book,
Fine-Tuning Your Strokes, focuses on the mechanics of all four competitive
strokes, beginning with the freestyle, and then moving on to backstroke, butter-
fly, and breaststroke. The discussion of each stroke examines three essential
elements of swimming:
1. Maintaining a long body line that moves through the water with minimal
resistance
2. Generating power from your core
3. Staying relaxed and in the flow of the stroke
The supporting photographs provide visual images that you can take from
the book to the water. Peek inside the minds of champions when world-class
swimmers, who continue to challenge the record books as masters, discuss
their motivation and technique.
The final chapter of part II is dedicated to starting, turning, and finishing.
Whether you choose to compete in a pool meet or simply want to improve your
workouts, you must learn to negotiate the walls quickly, smoothly, and with
minimal resistance. The simple, illustrated steps of the basic flip turn show you
that turning is a lot less mysterious—and a lot more fun—than it looks.
Perhaps the most creative part of swimming is molding your workouts to
achieve your goals. You may want to swim for improved fitness and stress relief
or train for competition. Regardless of your goals, you'll be more successful
and less prone to injury if you have a well-formulated plan that includes both
in-water and dry-land training. Part III of this book, Conditioning for Success,
guides you in creating a balanced training plan with a variety of workouts.

Preface xi
To improve your fitness, you must vary your heart rate and the use of different
muscle groups by changing things up between workouts. Variations in the pool
include swimming fast and swimming easy, building sets and descending sets,
leg-specific sets, technique-focused sets, and starting and turning sets. After
an introduction to the concepts of aerobic, anaerobic, and power swimming,
this section provides workout samples and simple guidelines for designing your
training weeks. If you're new to the swimming world, look for the sidebars that
explain the pace clock and send-off intervals.
Consistent and well-designed dry-land workouts transform a good swimming
program into a great swimming program. Your time in the gym and your time
in the pool will work together to create a balanced and injury-proof training
program. The exercises presented in this book focus on three critical areas
for swimmers: increased flexibility, shoulder stabilization, and core strength
and balance. Again, the illustrations and photographs provide visual images
of excellent technique for these key exercises for swimmers.
Taking the plunge into lakes, rivers, and oceans certainly brings a whole new
set of challenges, including the tides, the currents, the winds, the chop, and
the absence of a black line on the bottom! The open-water swimming chapter
begins with the basics of relaxation and navigation and progresses through
more advanced racing strategies. Those new to the open water should note the
tips for a great first experience. All swimmers, from triathletes and open-water
competitors, will benefit from the sample workouts that take place both in the
pool and in the surf.
Pool and open-water competitions are available to adult swimmers in all areas
of the United States. These competitions are excellent opportunities to measure
your progress and have fun while sharing your love of the water with other adult
swimmers. Part IV, Competition, introduces you to these events, such as what
to expect on race day and how to prepare yourself for competition.
It's time to dive in! Enjoy the ride as this book helps you create a vision, build
better strokes, and design a training plan suited for your goals.

This page intentionally left blank.

Acknowledgments
W
Te could fill a second volume with the names and contributions of
the friends and associates that provided support both directly and
indirectly in bringing this book from concept to print. Our heartfelt
thanks go to all the individuals and organizations that contributed their exper-
tise and guidance.
Cecil Colwin, distinguished international coach and swimming historian,
was the inspiration behind this book. His research and published works helped
frame the stroke mechanics and training chapters.
Dave Tanner, PhD, and Joel Stager, PhD, both of the Counsilman Center for
the Science of Swimming, provided invaluable information and feedback on
anything to do with the science of swimming.
Innovative stroke technician Coach Bill Boomer generously shared his
thoughts and ideas on relaxation, breathing, and body balance in the water.
Melon Dash, founder of Miracle Swimming Institute, provided helpful sug-
gestions for chapter 3 and permission to use materials from her book Conquer
Your Fear of Water.
Dr. Brent Rushall, author and publisher of Swimming Science Research, pro-
vided input on the fifth stroke and on starts and turns.
Coach Dick Bower pioneered the concept of cruise intervals, which are an
integral part of our masters programs and discussed in chapter 10.
Nancy Ammann Pigeon, PT, STC, CSCS, served as our guiding light for the
exercises and descriptions presented in chapter 11 on dry-land training. Ted
Becker, PhD, provided valuable feedback, particularly in the area of injury
prevention.
The coaching staff of Southern Methodist University swim team graciously
allowed us use of their facilities to photograph the images in this book. We
especially thank assistant women's coach Dominique Diezi for her help as a
swim model and her suggestions on snorkel training.
Thank you to the champions who donated their time to model and also
shared their thoughts on stroke technique and race tactics: Chris Derks (open
water), David Guthrie and Katie McClelland (breaststroke), Martina Maracova
(butterfly), Lia Oberstar (backstroke), and Richard Schroeder (racing). Thank
you to Bart Fassino and Ed Wagner, who also demonstrated their expertise for
the camera.
Michael Collins, head coach of MultiSports Orange County and the NOVA
Aquatic Masters, shared his expertise in open-water swimming and racing.
Trip Hedrick, a phenomenal swim instructor and coach, shared his ideas
and expertise on stroke mechanics and drills.
xiii

xiv Acknowledgments
Steve Haufler, the very creative head coach of the Orinda Country Club swim
program, was instrumental in providing information and feedback on starts,
turns, and finishes.
The Hall family, of the Race Club, contributed in several areas. Our thanks go
to Gary Hall Sr. for his help with Shoulder-Driven Freestyle and to Gary Hall Jr.
for his insights into dry-land training.
Masters swimmers Meghan Gibbons, Dave Thompson, and Mike Weksler
allowed us to share their stories and quotes. Tom Boyd and Mel Goldstein, of
United States Masters Swimming, Inc., provided guidance on masters swimming
organizations and clubs.
With special thanks from Jim to
Bobby Patten, head coach of Dallas Aquatic Masters—without his support in
making Dallas Aquatic Masters one of the premier adult swim programs in the
world, I would never have been able to experience and compile the informa-
tion contained in this book.
James “Doc” Counsilman, my college coach at Indiana University, who taught
me the science of swimming and coaching and inspired me to be a writer and
coach.
Jack Pettinger, head coach of Badger Aquatics and my club swim coach, who
took me from being a good swimmer to being a world and Olympic champion.
I know of no swim coach more humble and dedicated to helping his swimmers
succeed.
Stewart Ball, who helped me see my vision for writing this book and helped
form the basis of chapter 1.
Art Luetke, traveling and swim buddy for life, who contributed to chapter 14.
With special thanks from Mo to
Art Stockin, who put Ulster County, New York, on the swimming map when
he founded Stone Dock Swim Club in the early 1970s. Thank you, Coach, for
showing me true passion and heart. I'll always be a “docker."
Kathryn Begley, my very proud mom, who continues to provide unending
support for all of my endeavors.
My family and most enthusiastic fans, Dave, Trey, and Colton—I love you!

Taking the
Plunge

This page intentionally left blank.

Start With
a Vision,
Train With
a Plan
1
I have been visualizing myself every night for the past four years
standing on the podium having the gold placed around my neck.
-Megan Jendrick (née Quann), double gold medalist,
2000 Olympic Games
T
The big picture changed for Jim Montgomery while standing on the deck of his
high school pool in Madison, Wisconsin. Jim, then a skinny 14-year-old boy
without focus or drive, internalized the words of his coach, Pat Barry, who
spoke to him about his untapped potential. These words opened up opportunities
that Jim had never even considered, and a vision of what had seemed impossible
suddenly began to seem possible. Olympic champions, as well as champions in
every walk of life, have the ability to think outside of the box. Whether it's in the
pool or out on dry land, every success story starts with a vision.
No vision or dream will come to fruition without a clear set of goals, the
specific short-term and long-term milestones that map out your journey. In turn,
you will never achieve your goals without a clearly charted plan to move you
from one milestone to the next. In masters swimming, any practice session may
have as many visions, goals, and training plans as there are swimmers in the
pool. Although the swimmers are on individual journeys, their paths cross with
others' when they swim as a team in a pool session. The most successful masters
programs thrive on this diversity and welcome adult swimmers of all levels.
3

4 Mastering Swimming
THE VISION
Every endeavor, whatever the level, begins with a vision. Consider the ques-
tions you ask yourself in the process of choosing a new job: Have you thought
it through? Do the demands of the position fit into your life? Will you be able to
make the commitment necessary in order to follow through? Before you dive
into a swim program, ask yourself those questions to develop a vision of where
you'd like to take your swimming.
Close your eyes for 60 seconds and let yourself dream about your goals.
What is it that you want to gain from swimming? Is swimming just one facet of
a bigger fitness program, or is it your main focus? Are you training for a specific
pool competition, an open-water swim, or a triathlon? Are you swimming to
reach a new level of fitness? Are you looking to improve your technique and
learn new skills? Write down all your thoughts and ideas, even if they seem
crazy and out of reach.
No matter how impossible your vision may seem, you can achieve it with
the right amount of commitment to an appropriate training plan. Mo recalls the
day that she first met Dave, a physically fit runner and bicyclist with a vision of
completing an Ironman-length triathlon. Given his level of fitness and strong
commitment to his goal, Mo's first impression was that the 2.6-mile (4 km) swim,
112-mile (180 km) bike ride, and 26.2-mile (42 km) run would be challenging for
him, but possible. Dave then explained that he could not swim at all; in fact, on
three different occasions in the navy, he had to be rescued while attempting a
75-meter swim test. Nevertheless, Mo was struck by Dave's absolute commitment
to his vision and his ability to see it so clearly. Together, Mo and Dave worked
on his swimming skills, set goals, and developed a training plan that would
work with his busy life as a dentist and father.
In less than one year, Dave was standing confidently at the starting line of
the New Zealand Ironman race. He surpassed his own expectations on the first
leg of the race by swimming faster than expected. But while running up the
ramp out of the water, Dave stepped on a piece of glass and lacerated the sole
of his foot. As a doctor, he understood the severity of the wound and quickly
hobbled into the medical tent. After receiving several stitches, Dave went back
out on the course to live out his vision and completed the bike ride and the run.
Not even a freshly stitched foot would prevent Dave from fulfilling his dream.
He saw his vision clearly, he trained confidently with a smart plan, and he was
100 percent committed to it.
Goals
Goals are a series of milestones, or steps, that line the path toward the vision.
Every great business plan includes yearly, quarterly, and monthly goals. The
marathon runner slowly builds up to the 26.2-mile distance with runs of shorter
distances. Likewise, the Olympic swimmer focuses on smaller, key swim meets
in the years leading up to the big event. Short-term goals provide a means of

Start With a Vision, Train With a Plan 5
measuring your progress and, if necessary, an opportunity to adjust your plan.
As you achieve each milestone, you raise the bar of your expectations, build
your confidence, and move closer to realizing your dream.
Jim reflects on the seven years of preparation for his Olympic bid: “I had a
burning desire to avoid plateaus and improve my performance in every swim
season. The amazing part was that getting better did not always translate into
first place and faster times. Several times I had colossal failures, which gave
me a better understanding of how I needed to train. I would make a change in
my training and build back my confidence. My confidence turned into convic-
tion, which then became certainty, knowing beyond a shadow of a doubt that
I would succeed."
The dedication and work ethic of swimming champions are inspiring. What
is it that sets these elite athletes apart? They have all of the elements essential
for competing at the world level. They are young, extremely fit, and naturally
gifted, but perhaps more important, they are incredibly competitive. They are
singularly focused on their vision and they are highly motivated to succeed.
It is clearly not realistic for adults with families and careers to make this level
of commitment to an athletic endeavor. Very few adults have an additional 6
to 8 hours each day to put aside for the in-water training, dry-land workouts,
stretching, and bodywork that are required of world-class athletes. You can,
however, assess your abilities in terms of age, fitness, available time, and motiva-
tion. Once you understand those factors, you can set realistic goals in line with
your vision. Your goals should be challenging but within your capabilities.
Begin setting your goals by assessing your current skills. Are you new to
swimming or a veteran of the water? All swimmers, regardless of experience,
should have at least one goal specific to their stroke technique. If you are a
novice swimmer, you should focus on gaining comfort in the water and devel-
oping a relaxed, streamlined, and efficient stroke, first in freestyle and then in
the other strokes. More-experienced swimmers should concentrate on refining
their strokes, gaining power, and learning competitive starts and turns.
As you read part II of this book, Fine-Tuning Your Strokes, you will encounter
an incredible number of details about the four competitive swimming strokes,
turns, and starts. Because it is not possible to think about all of them at once,
focus on one or two concepts per workout. Think about your swimming strokes
in terms of your priorities. What improvements in your stroke will move you
toward your ultimate vision? Do you need to lengthen your stroke or perfect
your flip turn? You can chart a clear path to your final goal with a calendar
detailing your workouts with daily, weekly, and monthly goals. The process of
learning and improving stroke mechanics requires time and concentration, but
taken in small bits, one piece at a time, it can be accomplished.
As you set your goals, consider your life beyond your swimming: your family,
your career, and your school, religious, or community obligations. How much
time is available for training? Will you get enough sleep? You cannot meet your
swimming goals without a comfortable balance between your life away from
the pool and your fitness pursuits.

6 Mastering Swimming
What Motivates You?
Motivation, or lack of it, is usually the tipping point in any fitness program. Coaches
know that swimmers who regularly attend workouts are more likely to continue
with the sport. Motivated swimmers find it easier to get to the pool and, as a result,
are more likely to reach their goals. Therefore, take some time to think about what
motivates you. What will keep you on the path toward your final goal?
As you read through the following list of motivators, you will likely find several
that fit you. Many motivators are positive side effects of the sport that evolve
into the main reasons that swimmers return to the pool year after year. Read
through each one carefully, decide which ones apply to you, and take some
notes. Understanding what motivates you helps you select appropriate goals.
1. Fitness. Swimming is a core-based, full-body exercise that can benefit
every adult. It complements running and other weight-bearing sports
because it puts less stress on the joints and tendons, therefore causing
fewer injuries and allowing for more consistent training. Perhaps the main
motivator for most masters swimmers is fitness. Swimmers often check
their fitness progress by using specific, repeatable test sets. Samples of
these types of swims appear in chapter 10, Pool Workouts. These test
sets, or benchmark sets, lend themselves to setting goals.
2. Science. If you're intrigued by exercise science, the swimming pool
provides you with an amazing laboratory. There are infinite measurable
components, including your heart rate, the split times on the pace clock,
your strokes per length, and your work-to-rest ratios. Swimmers motivated
by the science of swimming are fascinated with fluid dynamics and the
question of what makes champion swimmers fast.
3. The water. For many swimmers, water represents something natural,
refreshing, and aesthetically pleasing. When they were children, their
parents probably dragged them out of the swimming pool after hours of
play and had to put time limits on their baths. Water simply is the place
some people feel most at home. The buoyancy of water reduces body
weight by 90 percent, making swimming attractive to people of all shapes
and sizes. Water is indeed a great equalizer.
4. Technique. Swimmers never stop refining their strokes and learning to
swim more efficiently. From the fundamentals to the finer points, such
as generating more power and reducing drag, the mechanics of swim-
ming provide endless opportunities for athletes to perfect their move-
ments. Swimmers intrigued with improving their technique never miss
an opportunity to join a swim clinic or watch another video of champion
swimmers. They are always ready to embrace new and unusual stroke
drills the coach tries out. They are students of the art of swimming.

Start With a Vision, Train With a Plan 7
5. Overcoming fear. A Gallup poll taken in 1998 showed that much of the
U.S. population is not comfortable in water: 64 percent of people polled
were uncomfortable in deep, open water, 46 percent experienced anxiety
in deep water in pools, and 39 percent were afraid to put their heads
underwater (Stillwell 2007). Many of these swimmers challenge their
fears by either enrolling in adult swim lessons or joining a masters swim
program. With commitment and good coaching, people can learn to
swim with a relaxed stroke and proper breathing.
6. Competition. Masters swimmers who are motivated by competition will
find plenty of opportunities. There are masters swim meets, open-water
events, and triathlons. There are also postal events, in which you swim
in the comfort of your own pool and send your results to an event coor-
dinator who publishes a complete list of participants' results. Swimmers
who thrive on competition are encouraged to consult a coach when
planning their training programs to ensure that their efforts will properly
target their events.
7. Injury rehabilitation. Many land-based athletes join masters swimming
programs to maintain their fitness levels while rehabilitating their knees,
ankles, or feet. These athletes may never leave masters swimming when
they discover how perfectly swimming complements their weight-bearing
exercises. Swimming is an excellent way for runners to build and maintain
upper-body and core strength, which will make them more resistant to
injury in all sports.
8. Weight loss. One hour of swimming can burn as many calories in an hour
as high-impact aerobics, hiking, and ice skating. Because weight loss is
about burning more calories than one eats, most masters swimmers who
combine consistent workouts with sensible diets lose weight.
9. Stress relief. Many masters swimmers who are extremely motivated in
their careers and family lives view their time in the pool as complete
relaxation. Although some of them enjoy competition, the majority of
them have no intention of ever competing. What they have in common
with competitive swimmers is the ability to leave their worries behind
when they jump into the pool.
10. Self-esteem. Building your level of fitness and achieving your swimming
goals will feed your self-confidence and influence all aspects of your
life, including your personal relationships and career. Jim attributes
his success in building one of the largest adult swim programs in the
country to the confidence he gained through swimming: “Through age
and experience, I have grown less competitive in the water but more
confident and committed to making a positive impact on people's
lives."

8 Mastering Swimming
11. Friendship. The team environment that characterizes structured swim
workouts builds a unique bond among its members. Longtime swimmers
often form their strongest friendships during their swimming experiences.
The uniformity of the swimsuit and goggles wash away differences in
occupation, social status, and financial standing. In the pool, a sense of
belonging and the spirit of teamwork prevail.
In any given workout, the following kinds of people may be sharing a pool: a
triathlete preparing for the next local multisport event, a runner who is staying
active while recovering from knee surgery, and a CEO of a major corporation
looking for one hour of relaxation in the day. The beauty of swimming in a
structured workout group is that all of the swimmers' goals, ages, abilities, and
levels of commitment blend together as a team when the workout commences.
The swimmers get exactly what they want from the workout while enjoying the
camaraderie of the group.
THE PLAN
Moving from a vision and goals to an attainable plan charted out by days, weeks,
and months can seem like an overwhelming task. Many athletes abandon the
vision and call it impossible during the planning stage. However, if you begin
with a clear assessment of your initial skills and chart a steady progression
toward your goal, your vision becomes attainable.
Each athlete's training plan consists of two parts: the technical aspect, which
includes comfort level in the water and stroke mechanics, and the fitness and
training aspect. For example, swimmers who would like to complete a 1-mile
(1.6 km) open-water swim will plan to focus on building endurance and improv-
ing efficiency in the freestyle stroke. By building their skills slowly in each of
these two aspects, swimmers can more easily write their plans and focus on
their vision.
Although often overlooked, the technical aspects of a training plan are
the most critical to the success of many swimmers. Part II of this book, Fine-
Tuning Your Strokes, presents all four competitive strokes, beginning with the
favored freestyle, or crawl, stroke. This basic conditioning stroke is preferred
by triathletes and many fitness swimmers. Next is the backstroke, which nicely
complements the freestyle with its similar rhythm. In addition, the backstroke
works some opposing muscles to those used in the freestyle, creating a bal-
ance of strength in both strokes. Following the backstroke are the butterfly and
breaststroke, which share many qualities and teaching progressions. The final
chapter of part II focuses on negotiating the walls at starts, turns, and finishes—
details