MASTERS
SWIMMING
A MANUAL
LUCERO/BLEUL-GOHLKE
MEYER
& MEYER
SPORT
MASTERS SWIMMING – A MANUAL
DEDICATIONS
To Eric and Bonnie,
forever my beautiful kids.
Thank you for swimming with me.
From Blythe
To my wonderful children Nils and Hanna-Tineke
who always put up with my swimming.
From Cornelia
To all the swimmers and coaches who have touched our lives.
From Both of Us
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Blythe Lucero/Cornelia Bleul-Gohlke
MASTERS SWIMMING - A MANUAL
Oxford: Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd., 2006
ISBN-10: 1-84126-185-8
ISBN-13: 978-1-84126-185-0
All rights reserved, especially the right to copy and distribute, including the translation rights. No part of this
work may be reproduced – including by photocopy, microfilm or any other means – processed, stored
electronically, copied or distributed in any form whatsoever without the written permission of the
publisher.
© 2006 by Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd.
Aachen, Adelaide, Auckland, Budapest, Graz, Johannesburg, New York,
Olten (CH), Oxford, Singapore, Toronto
Member of the World
Sports Publishers' Association (WSPA)
www.w-s-p-a.org
Printed and bound by: B.O.S.S Druck und Medien GmbH, Germany
ISBN-10: 1-84126-185-8
ISBN-13: 978-1-84126-185-0
E-Mail: verlag@m-m-sports.com
www.m-m-sports.com
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword
Introduction
..........
.....8
12
Chapter 1: Take the Plunge!
..
Why Masters Swimming?
A Brief History of Masters Swimming
The Many Faces of Masters Swimming
Chapter 2: Masters Swimming Readiness
Check in with Your Doctor
Equipment
Around the Pool
Lane Etiquitte
..
.....
16
16
28
30
..............
................
44
.44
..
46
..51
..54
Workout Jargon
Under the Sun
Staying Fit to Swim
Swimming with Health Limitations
Chapter 3: Working Out
•
The Basics of Swimming Performance
The Fundamentals of Stroke Technique
Analyzing Swimming Technique
The Strokes
Freestyle
Backstroke
.58
60
61
...........
69
...74
.........
...74
76
78
80
80
...............................
..............
90
5
6
Table of Contents
Butterfly
Breaststroke
Conditioning
Achieving Better Swimming
Chapter 4: The Masters Swim Team
........
...............
Finding an Existing Team
Structuring a New Team
Chapter 5: Sticking with It
.........
..
...
•
98
106
116
. 135
136
136
. 138
.........
166
What Masters Swimmers Think About
166
Measuring Progress
168
Making a Routine that Works
..................
. 179
Last Word
...
References
..........
Photo & Illustration Credits
•
182
..
.................
183
184
M
Masters Swimming
FLL
ET
7
FOREWORD
8
When I was growing up in competitive swimming in the late 1960s
and early 70s, my heroes included the fastest swimmers of the time,
not so much for their strength and power, but more for their
tremendous dedication to perfecting their skill. Those swimmers
knew how to move through the water! I studied their swimming and
came to the conclusion that what made them great was their ability
to understand of how swimming works, to focus on what needed to
be done, and to put it all together in competition. Like me, those
swimmers loved to swim, and they loved to swim well. Now, three
decades later, as a swim coach, I still look at these qualities with
awe when I observe them in a swimmer. They were immediately
apparent in Conny.
When she found our swim team, she was struggling to adjust to life
in the United States. Although she was comfortable with the English
language, it was clear she was uncomfortable with her new
surroundings. She looked worried and thin when I met her. In our
initial conversation, I learned that swimming had been a big part of
her life in Germany. As she looked longingly at the pool, I felt
that she was truly a fish out of water. When I invited her to get in,
her eyes twinkled, and she dove in without hardly interrupting
the water. I knew then that, whether in Berlin or Berkeley, the water
was her home.
Her swimming was relaxed yet powerful. She had versatility, polish,
and she had speed! Above all, it was clear that she loved to swim
and to do it well. She took great pleasure in the process of doing
the workout. She did each set with purpose. As she swam, I saw
clearly the qualities I admired in the great swimmers of my youth.
Conny swam with heart. As I watched her, the hair on my arms stood
on end!
It wasn't until later that I learned that she was both European and
World Champion in several events. She was, and still is, truly one of
the best female Masters swimmers in the world. Now after several
years with our team, I can only say what a pleasure it has been to be
involved in the swimming of such an athlete. She brings an enviable
commitment to the sport, and a real appreciation for our program.
Foreword
As a swimmer and as a person, she has become a part of the family
of our team.
Of the many highlights of my coaching career, one of the most
memorable experiences happened at the Short Course Nationals of
2003, under the blazing sun of Arizona. It was a great meet for our
whole team, with many best times and medals. Conny was in peak
physical condition and, looking like an athlete half her age, started
out the meet by winning the 400 I.M., coming from behind in Lane 8
to the cheers of her teammates and me. She followed up that
performance with a victory in the 200 breaststroke, leading the field
solidly after the first 100, and never letting go. Shortly before her
final event, the 200 I.M., as I was wilting in the relentless
temperature of the final day of the meet, Conny turned to me and
said, “You know, the heat is another competitor.” This statement
said it all to me. I knew then that she was going to swim the race of
her lifetime. Sure enough, she approached the block with an
intensity I had never seen. In the fastest heat, I watched her take on
the eight length race with focus, understanding, and heart. I watched
her reach inside and put it all together in an unforgettable swimming
performance that was not only her best, but the best. After the meet,
as I was still glowing from the successes of the swimmers on our
team, Conny amazed me once more. She said thank you to me for
her swimming.
It is with the utmost respect that I have worked on this book project
with Conny. Our relationship over the past several years has enriched
me as a person and inspired me as a swimming coach. It is my hope
that swimmers and coaches who read this book will find their
experience with Masters swimming to be equally meaningful.
Coach Blythe Lucero
9
10
Foreword
When I met Coach Blythe for the first time at workout she was late.
Another swimmer took me by the hand saying that she would come
soon and just to warm up a bit. That was at an outdoor pool in
Berkeley, California in November 2002. I had just moved to the
United States. I was already an experienced and successful Masters
swimmer in Germany. In fact, I had been on a swim team since I was
a child, but never one dedicated only to Masters, with its own coach.
Some swimmers were warming up and some others introduced
themselves to me. They ranged in age from 20 to 65, I guessed, and
were all very kind. Then she came. An ageless-looking women with
immensely long blond hair stepped confidently through the door to
the pool deck greeting everybody by asking them if they'd already
warmed up. “We have a new good swimmer here for our team,“ the
girl who had guided me through the locker rooms announced,
although I was still dry, standing on the deck. Blythe introduced
herself to me and we talked a bit about my former swimming career,
but she could see how eager I was to get in the pool.
It was one of the nicest and most pleasurable workouts I had ever
swum and, after more than 32 years of swimming, you can guess
how many workouts I have done. Not only was it that the pool was
unexpectedly warm and the California air so refreshing, it was that
every minute, every yard, every set of the training was a pleasure.
And it has been like this for me ever since.
But why? Why is swimming with this Masters team so different?
Because of her! It didn't take long to find out why Blythe makes your
day into a good one with every workout she provides. She just has
the right feeling for everything concerning swimming. And I don't just
mean her diversified workout plans, or that she is always on deck
with the swimmers. No, it is the warmness, the humanness, the love
with which she approaches so many different characters on the
team, with so many different histories (in swimming and in private
life) and such different expectations regarding swimming. She has all
this and, together with her immense knowledge and experience of
swimming, she gives it so generously and unselfishly to everybody
Foreword
who comes to swim. She doesn't want anything back and is just
content seeing everybody swimming their laps fast or slow, improving
technique and conditioning and leaving the pool pleasantly fatigued
and satisfied. She has a word and an ear for everybody, no matter if
it is about swimming or something else. She is the reason people
find their way back to the pool and swim even if they are pregnant,
have kids and family duties, were seriously ill, divorced or have been
going though other problems. Afterwards, they feel better and are
able to face their situations with more confidence.
This is the magic of Blythe's coaching, and that's why we have such
a nice team whose members can swim together at the same time in
the same pool despite being age 20 to 70 and older, coming from
very different nationalities, or swimming on different levels. We may
not be the largest team, or the one with the most record holders,
but we have the best team.
It is a gift to have such a coach, even though I am not 16 anymore or
on a college scholarship. I'm very grateful for this. It is also an honor
for me to have worked on this book with Blythe. I hope and wish
that everyone who reads this book will get the most benefit out of
our work and partnership, not only in terms of swimming.
Keep swimming, Masters swimmers! Keep coaching, Masters coaches!
Cornelia Bleul-Gohlke
11
INTRODUCTION
12
Welcome to the world of Masters swimming. This book, written
jointly by a Masters coach and a Masters swimmer, springs from the
love of swimming. Throughout the development of this book,
swimming has been a daily part of the process. It has invigorated us,
challenged us, comforted us, and made us feel complete. As we
continue to enjoy swimming, we are constantly amazed at the many
ways that swimming improves our quality of life. We are older but
we are healthy! The lifelong relationship each of us has enjoyed with
this sport has been a strong influence in our development as people.
As adults, it continues to impact the way we approach life.
This book is designed for swimmers and coaches: for those who are
currently involved in Masters swimming, and for those considering
entering Masters swimming, either as a first-time experience, or as
reemerging athletes and coaches.
No Previous Competitive Swimming Experience Required
This book is designed to guide novice swimmers into life as Masters
swimmers and to help make their swimming more efficient and
enjoyable along the way.
Come Back to Life in the Fast Lane
This book is designed to inspire former competitors to return to their
domain without many of the pressures they remember, but all of the
excitement and opportunities for competition, if they want it.
How to Shake “Tin Man Syndrome”
This book is designed to encourage sedentary people of all ages to
take up the lifestyle of Masters swimming to improve their flexibility,
muscle tone and cardiovascular health.
Fun, Friends, Fitness
This book is designed to motivate fitness swimmers to new
horizons, while enriching their social lives through friendships,
special events and the team aspects of Masters swimming.
Introduction
Masters Swim Team Seeks Coach
This book is designed to share with coaches the rewards and the
challenges of forming and running a successful Masters swimming
program, including issues unique to adult swimming.
Throughout the pages of this book, we have attempted to share our
combined 60–some years of life in swimming with the reader in a
way that celebrates, guides and inspires him or her to the full
spectrum of Masters swimming.
In Chapter 1, the phenomenon of Masters swimming is described as
a viable and beneficial fitness activity for adults of all ages, while
the social aspects are revealed as one of its main attractions. The
reader will find a bit of himself or herself through a series of true
stories about Masters swimmers. A history of the birth and
development of Masters swimming completes this chapter.
Chapter 2 offers a basic introduction to swimmer's equipment and
the swimming environment. The reader will also learn about lane
etiquitte, swimming jargon, sun sense, understanding pain, and
swimming with health limitations. Swimmers will approach Masters
swimming ready to swim for life!
Chapter 3 covers the important relationship between technique and
conditioning. Each of the four competitive swimming strokes is
described in detail and illustrated in a series of diagrams. A
troubleshooting section accompanies each stroke section. An
overview of the process of conditioning and sections on the
elements of a workout and dry land training are included to assist in
the development of better swimming.
In Chapter 4, the focus is on the team aspects of Masters swimming.
The reader will learn how to find a Masters swim team that fits his
or her expectations. In addition, this chapter looks at how to start
13
Introduction
a new team and the many issues involved in operating it
successfully. The unique aspects of coaching adult swimmers and
swim teams are also addressed.
In the final chapter, subjects include motivation and establishing a
swimming routine. The thought process of swimmers as they move
from one level to the next is described. Measuring progress is
discussed in terms of physical improvements, goal setting and
challenges in both competition and workout. Sticking with it,
through the initial stages of swimming, is identified as a swimmer's
biggest challenge.
LINK Throughout this book, a system of links in the margin has been
included to make it easy for the reader to cross-reference information
found elsewhere in the text. As so many swimming issues are
interrelated, we thought this was an important element to add.
It has been our goal to create a user-friendly book, which makes
Masters swimming approachable to all adults interested in
improving, regaining and maintaining fitness. We hope you enjoy our
book, and we hope you use it to build a lasting relationship with
Masters swimming.
Finally, we want to acknowledge the many supporters of this project,
including our families who believed in us; Vince who read each
chapter-in-progress late into the night; Meredith and Jessica who
edited with great care and skill; Steve and Kurt for their expert
photography; Tami for being such a team player, and all the talented
swimmers of Berkeley Aquatic Masters whose images grace the
pages of this book.
14
Masters Swimming
12442
15
CHAPTER 1
TAKE THE PLUNGE!
1 Why Masters Swimming?
1.1
ADULT FITNESS
Over the past few decades, the worldwide movement toward adult
fitness reflects the growing sentiment that staying fit is not
something that has to end with childhood. Until recently, it was only
the elite athlete who was afforded the social acceptance to continue
an athletic lifestyle into his or her adult years. And still, with a few
exceptions, professional ball players, cyclists, weightlifters, runners
and swimmers retired long before they were “middle aged.” But the
recent rise of adult fitness programs and associations, such as
Masters swimming, have created not only more opportunities for
adults to be physically fit, but have helped change the way society
looks at adult fitness. Until very recently, adults who continued to
pursue fitness with more than a casual interest were seen as aging
people refusing to let go of their youth, unable to accept “growing
again gracefully.” Slowly, but surely, this attitude is changing.
It is more common to hear of adults involved in physical fitness
described with esteem rather than ridicule, and more and more
credence is given to the saying “you are only as old as you feel.”
Physically fit adults in their 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s and beyond are
now called “adult athletes” by the evolved bystander, as they
continue to defy athletic barriers.
Still, participating in a fitness routine as an adult takes some
personal initiative and persistence. Masters swimming has become
one of the most widespread adult fitness activities, with an
international network of places to swim and events, making it both
accessible and popular. But, beyond the issues of logistics and
social acceptance, there are several hurdles that must be overcome
to make fitness as an adult a true lifestyle.
16
50
45
55 60 5
40
Take the Plunge!
10
35 30 25
15
20
17
18
Masters Swimming
HURDLE #1
Other Priorities
In adulthood, career and family take center stage. Time constraints
are the norm, and the stress of adding one more element to the mix,
such as a personal fitness routine, can be daunting. Often it seems
that in order to add in fitness, something else has to be sacrificed.
In reality, this sacrifice is already taking place: your fitness is being
sacrificed so that all the other priorities can be met. Now, no one is
suggesting shirking work and family responsibilities in order to take
up a fitness routine. This point is made very well by the pre-takeoff
safety talk heard when travelling by airplane. In describing the
proper use of the oxygen mask the flight attendant instructs the
traveler to secure his or her own mask, before helping children and
others. Why? Because if we do not take care of ourselves, we are
useless to others.
Taking care of ourselves is truly the best way to ensure that we will
be there to take care of the people and responsibilities in our lives.
In addition to cardiovascular health, weight control and muscle tone,
study upon study has shown a decrease in stress and an increase in
energy and productivity directly attributable to physical fitness.
Swimming in particular is cited by many of these studies as the
single most beneficial fitness activity for adults, due to its longevity
as a viable activity, as well as the low incidence of negative affects
associated with it.
The bottom line is time management. Finding an hour or so in the
day, three to four days a week is a challenge. Some people find it
before work, some at lunchtime, others find that hour on the way
home from work. Some people do it with their children nearby, some
do it in rotation with their spouse, some even do it with their cell
phone or pager on the edge of the pool. All in all, making the time
to devote to one's own fitness is a decisive way to improve quality
of life over the long term.
Take the Plunge!
HURDLE #2
Breaking out of the Sedentary Lifestyle
It is an accepted fact that human beings reach their physical peak
around the age of 18 to 21, and that after that age, the natural aging
process leads to a slow decline in strength, endurance, speed and
flexibility. But is the rate of this natural aging process related more to
chronological age or physiological age? We all know 55-year-olds who
can jump higher, run faster, and swim farther than some 30-year-olds.
The crucial factor in the natural aging process is activity level.
By the time we reach our 20s, without maintaining the physical
activity level of our youth, the growth of fast twitch muscle fiber
decreases, weight gain occurs as metabolism slows, cardiovascular
ability declines, and joints stiffen.
Now those people who have maintained an active lifestyle without a
break since they were teenagers will have little adjustment to make
when taking up an activity like Masters swimming. But for most of
us, this is not the case. For most of us, a sedentary lifestyle has
taken hold. From working at a desk all day, to child bearing and
rearing, our level of physical activity is far less than it was when we
were younger. Regaining a physically active body is surely a
challenge but not an insurmountable one.
Breaking free of a sedentary lifestyle is not something that will yield
immediate results. It is a process of rebuilding, and it will take time.
The longer the break, the longer it can take. But remember, in taking
on the lifestyle of an adult athlete, it is not only the goal that is
important, it is the process. The hardest part is to take the first
step...or stroke. Swimming is an ideal fitness activity for adults who
have been sedentary for any length of time. The non-impact nature
of swimming makes joint pain less of an issue during activity. The
reduced gravity environment of the water means that weight gain is
not as much of a hindrance as it is in many other sports. Because
swimming uses every major muscle group, cardiovascular benefits
begin right away. Stroke by stroke you can swim your way to fitness.
19
Masters Swimming
HURDLE #3
Making a Commitment
Becoming motivated to take up a fitness routine as an adult, such as
Masters swimming is one half in making a commitment. Staying
motivated is the other. Making a commitment means you are in for
the long haul. And it won't always be easy. Things will get in your
way. There will be disruptions to your routine. Measurable results
may be hard for you to see sometimes. You might become tired,
discouraged, and maybe sore at first.
Taking one day at a time is essential. Be forgiving to yourself. If you
miss a day, oh well! One day will not make or break your fitness
routine. Getting back on track is an important part of maintaining
your commitment.
Remember, there is no timetable. Avoid making goals that measure
success and failure, like: “By March 15, I am going to swim 100 yards
in a minute.” Choose instead to measure your progress with
statements such as: “At first it took me 22 strokes to cross the pool,
now it only takes me 18.”
Let things develop, and believe in what you are doing. Never give
up. Enjoy the process of building your fitness. Take pride in yourself.
Are you ready to make a commitment? Come on, take the plunge!
1.2 MASTERS SWIMMING VS. LAP SWIM
So you have decided to take up swimming as your adult fitness
routine. You have taken the steps of making time in your schedule,
and have found a convenient swimming pool. Now what?
Most pools offer Lap Swim, when the pool is open for swimmers to
basically do their own thing. Many lap swims are organized into
sections for slower, medium and faster swimmers. Lap swims usually
have a lane pattern so that swimmers, like drivers on the road, do
not bump into each other while they share a lane. Lap swimming
20
Take the Plunge!
offers swimmers the opportunity to swim at their own pace, swim
what and how they choose to, and stop and go when they want.
There are drawbacks however. Lap swims can get crowded, and with
everyone's perception of "fast" and "slow" being different, lane
congestion can develop, leading to impatience by some swimmers,
comparable to “road rage.” Each lap swimmer's routine is different.
For instance, while you might want to swim 20 lengths without
stopping, the person in front of you might want to stop at the wall
after each length for a minute or two. You may be swimming the
breaststroke, and the person behind you is tailgating you doing
freestyle. Lap swim can be frustrating for many swimmers. Others
find the lap swim environment perfectly acceptable. It remains a
popular program at many pools.
Deciding what to swim is the next issue. You could just get in and
swim back and forth for the entire time you have set aside for your
swimming. You could create your own routine of various strokes and
distances. But what sort of swimming activities will help develop
fitness best and most quickly? Choosing the best swimming activities
is a difficult task for many swimmers and can easily lead to time
wasted, lack of focus, boredom and loss of motivation. Even for the
experienced swimmer, creating a workout and then doing it is a
challenge and a hard routine to stick to.
21
22
Masters Swimming
The alternative is the Masters swimming environment that offers
many benefits that lap swim does not. In Masters swimming, a
structured workout is provided, other swimmers do that workout
with you, and feedback is available about your swimming. For many
swimmers, joining a Masters swim team has been an important
factor in staying with their swimming routine.
Having the workout provided by a coach changes the activity from
just swimming into training. The challenge of doing the workout
from start to finish is quite appealing to many swimmers.
Experienced Masters swim coaches create workouts designed to
build endurance, speed and versatility, and improve technique.
Workouts are planned with enough variety to keep swimmers
engaged during the workout and interested enough to come back for
subsequent workouts. Some Masters swim teams have themed
workouts for each day of the week, for instance “Fin Monday” or
"Sprint Friday.” Some teams offer special workouts for seniors,
commuters and other groups.
Doing the workout with other swimmers is very motivating to most
people. With the workout as a common activity, swimmers usually
find that they swim with more energy than they would by
themselves. Being with a group of swimmers who are all doing the
same workout creates a supportive environment, as well as an
opportunity for competition, for those who want it. In Masters
swimming workouts, swimmers are usually grouped by speed, which
leads to smoother running lanes.
Finally, the Masters swimming environment offers the opportunity
for stroke improvement. Having a coach analyze your swimming
and suggest ways to improve is extremely helpful. Then, thinking
about the feedback you get also gives you something to concentrate
on when you might instead be thinking about how hard the workout
is. No matter what level swimmer you are, there are many ways you
can improve your stroke. Swimming technique is studied and
practiced by Olympic champions as much as it is by beginners.
Improving your swimming technique will only make swimming easier
and more enjoyable.
Take the Plunge!
Masters swimming offers a program that swimmers can build upon
through the structure and variety of coached workouts. Masters
swimming offers a program swimmers can stick with through its
team environment and common goals. And Masters swimming
offers a program swimmers can grow with through feedback and
stroke correction, which is an essential piece of better, more
enjoyable swimming.
SOCIAL ASPECTS OF MASTERS SWIMMING
The strong social atmosphere present in many Masters swimming
programs is a valued part of most swimmers' experience. Being part
of a stable social group is something that often seems to get set
aside in the busy lives of many adults. The camaraderie of Masters
swimming begins during workout, and often blossoms into lasting
friendships carried on beyond the pool. Masters swimmers socialize
in many ways including:
Workout Style Conversation
An interesting phenomenon common to most Masters swimming
workouts is a developing a conversation that is strung together by
the sets of the workout. Each set is punctuated by another minute or
1.3
23
Masters Swimming
two in a continuing light-hearted dialogue, and then is suspended
until the next rest break, where it is resumed seamlessly until the
next set begins. Some interesting subjects covered by this kind of
intellectual workout chat have included:
•
•
•
How peanuts grow, and whether they are really nuts
The best places to travel in the Caribbean
Menopause
• The role siblings order plays in personality traits
• Do watermelons float
• Good dentists
• Features of new water heaters
2
Social Kicking
Whether or not you believe that kick boards are beneficial to
swimming, they play an important role in Masters swimming. During
social kicking sets, swimmers kick side by side, catching up on news
and making weekend plans. Conversations are also carried out
across the pool, one swimmer kicking in Lane 2 and the other in
Lane 6. Jokes are shared. Dinner dates are made. “Happy birthday”
is sung. All this goes on while swimmers are in motion, propelled by
BAU
24
Take the Plunge!
their leg action and floppy feet, accomplishing 200 or more yards of
kicking, building their fitness while they build their friendships.
Aquatic Networking
At one point, there might be three architects, four teachers, two
doctors, and three attorneys swimming in the pool at once. This
presents quite an opportunity for shop talk. There are also times
when the skills of swimmers in transition, between jobs, are brought
to the attention of other swimmer/professionals and swimmers who
own small businesses.
The resources of the Masters swimmers in the pool at any one time
are quite extensive. One swimmer's house might be painted by a
house painter on the team. The car of one swimmer might have a
stereo installed by an audio professional from the pool. A swimmer
might even find a pet sitter at workout.
Food Talk
About three-quarters of the way through a workout, when calories are
running low, the topic of conversation inevitably turns to food.
Spontaneously, swimmers begin to describe their desired post-workout
snack or special treat with immense enthusiasm. Among the delicacies
that have been shared aloud, in order of frequency mentioned are:
• Pancakes
• Bananas
• Oatmeal
•
Cheesecake
• Ice Cream
2
In a sport where athletes can burn upwards of 600 calories per hour,
shared cravings during workout often result in a group outing to a
café or restaurant afterward, or the exchange of recipes.
25
26
Masters Swimming
Making Friends
While Masters swimmers are each unique in personality, background,
lifestyle and occupation, they are all joined by their swimming.
This common ground
becomes the base of
many friendships. Shared
experiences in the pool
create a strong bond
between swimmers. People
who might never cross
paths otherwise build
strong relationships in the
pool. Pool time creates
a kind of springboard for
CRYSEAL CA
many lasting friendships outside the water. For many, the friendships
made through swimming are a major reason to keep swimming.
Being Part of a Team
Masters swimming offers a sense of team that many adults have not
experienced since they were children. Belonging to a team gives us a
feeling of being part of something larger than ourselves. This group
identity puts things into a different perspective for us. It gives us a
further reason to strive for higher goals. “Doing it for the team” is a
great feeling. It makes us press on, when alone we might quit. It
makes us encourage each other. It makes us cheer!
5
BAM
Take the Plunge!
27
28
Masters Swimming
2 A Brief History of Masters
Swimming
Masters Swimming was so named following the lead of Masters
Track & Field, one of the only associations representing adult
athletes at the time. Many people are still confused by the name
“Masters swimming,” which brings to mind elite level athletics,
rather than the more encompassing population that the association
truly stands for. Some Masters swimmers have suggested that the
name be changed to “Veteran Swimming” or “Adult Swimming” to be
more accurate. But the way Masters began explains the name.
Masters swimming began when Captain Ransom J. Arthur had an
idea to hold a swim meet for adults in Texas. Arthur, a Navy doctor,
wanted to spark interest in swimming as fitness and encourage
adults to take up the sport to maintain and improve their health. His
idea was to bring together ex-competitive swimmers and Olympians
of years past from all over the United States for the event in order to
gain publicity for his cause. The swim meet drew overwhelming
response from retired swimmers all over the world. And the event
netted the media attention Captain Arthur was seeking.
His swim meet marked the official beginning of Masters swimming in
the United States in May 1970, with the first Masters National
Swimming Championships.
The Federation Internationale Natation, FINA, the international
governing body of competitive swimming, followed suit, adding
references to Masters swimming in its Rule Book as of 1972.
Today, Masters swimming is organized and active on five continents,
in countries including: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China,
Denmark, Egypt, France, Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Japan,
Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Scotland, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates, and the
United States.
Take the Plunge!
In the United States alone, over 43,000 people registered with
United States Masters Swimming in 2005. The same year, more than
450 swim teams and clubs also registered throughout the country.
Masters swimming events are held all over the globe including a
World Swimming Championship, held every other year, by a different
country every time.
Masters swimming is a large organization, but it is based in grassroots
activities. In the United States, the structure begins with individual
teams of swimmers operating in towns and cities across the country.
Each team operates under the umbrella of a regional swimming
committee, which represents a geographical zone including Oceana,
the Breadbasket, Dixie, Great Lakes, Northwest, Southwest, and
Southcentral. Each zone functions under the guidelines of United
States Masters swimming, the governing body of Masters Swimming
in the United States.
The mission of United States Masters Swimming is simple. It is to
promote fitness and health in adults by offering and supporting
Masters swimming programs. The organization is dedicated to the
premise that the lives of participants will be enhanced through
aquatic physical conditioning and competitions among its members
and those of other nations, in the spirit of good sportsmanship.
USMS
National Champion
B01
United States
Masters Swimming
29
Masters Swimming
3 The Many Faces of
Masters Swimming
Every Masters swimmer has a unique story. During many years of
coaching, I have been privileged to share many of them.
Here are a few of the many faces of Masters swimming.
3.1 THE RETIRED CHAMPION
Larry, a busy attorney, is nearing 50.
He drops in at workouts frequently,
but not on any particular schedule, without commitment, and knocks
out a couple thousand to ease his aching back. No sports bottle
containing an electrolyte-balancing drink for him: coffee is his
poolside beverage of choice. His swimming is flawless and graceful.
He understands swimming like the back of his hand. “Nice
backstroke, Larry!" I comment from the deck between sets. My words
evoke a smile as he pushes off for some last sprints. Larry, you see,
was a top college backstroker, about a quarter century ago. He swam
in a relay with Mark Spitz. The years have not dimmed his talent,
either. One day, I clocked him off the wall for a 100 backstroke. He
swam the four lengths in under a minute, without breaking a sweat.
“So, Larry,” I used to regularly ask him. “When am I going to see
you in a meet?” His expression would change, from the carefree
swimmer who is one with the water, to that of an over-worked
professional, asked to do one more thing. “Not me,” he would reply.
"My swim meet days are over." Although his time as an elite
collegiate athlete was punctuated by accolades and medals, his
memories of the four-year experience left him with the mindset that
he never, ever wants to swim like that again: the seemingly