OPEN WATER
SWIMMING MANUAL
AN EXPERT'S SURVIVAL GUIDE
FOR TRIATHLETES AND
OPEN WATER SWIMMERS
LYNNE COX
"THE GREATEST OPEN WATER SWIMMER."
-SPORTS ILLUSTRATED

Lynne Cox was born in Boston, Massachusetts, and grew up in Los Alamitos,
California, where she presently lives. She has held open water swimming
records all over the world, including, first at age fifteen, twice setting the record
for the fastest crossing of the English Channel, for men or women. Cox was a
member of the first group of teenagers to cross the Catalina Channel in
California. She has swum the twelve-mile Øresund and the Kattegat, both
between Denmark and Sweden. Cox was the first woman to swim across the
Cook Strait in New Zealand, and the first person to swim across the Strait of
Magellan in Chile, the Beagle Channel between Argentina and Chile, Lake
Baikal in Russia, and around the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa. In 1987
Cox crossed the Bering Strait from Alaska to the Soviet Union, and in 2002
swam more than a mile in the 31-degree Fahrenheit (0.5-degree Celsius) waters
off Antarctica. Cox has been inducted into the International Swimming Hall of
Fame. She is the author of Swimming to Antarctica, Grayson, and South with the
Sun. Her articles have appeared in many publications, among them The New
Yorker and the Los Angeles Times Magazine.

ALSO BY LYNNE COX
Grayson
South with the Sun
Swimming to Antarctica

Open Water
Swimming Manual
An Expert's Survival Guide for Triathletes
and Open Water Swimmers
LYNNE COX
Vintage Books
A Division of Random House, Inc.
New York

A VINTAGE ORIGINAL, JULY 2013
Copyright © 2013 by Lynne Cox
All rights reserved. Published by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and in
Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
Vintage and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Charts and slides courtesy of the United States Navy SEALs
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Cox, Lynne.
Open water swimming manual : an expert's survival guide for triathletes and open water swimmers / Lynne
Cox.
pages cm
eISBN: 978-0-345-80610-9
1. Long distance swimming—Training. I. Title.
GV838.53.L65C69 2013
797.2′1071-dc23 2013006165
Illustrations created by Estelle Cox
Author photograph © Ann Chatillon
www.vintagebooks.com
Cover design by Gabriele Wilson
Cover photograph © GS/Gallerystock
v3.1

To the Cadre

Excellence is an art won by training and habituation.
-Aristotle

Contents
Cover
About the Author
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph
Introduction
PART ONE: HOW TO BEGIN
Chapter 1: Beginnings
Allure of the Open Water
Expert Sources and Credentials
Chapter 2: Equipment
The Swimsuit
Swimsuit Care
Chafing
Skin Lubrication Products
Treatment for Chafing
Sunscreen Products
Sunburn Prevention
Sunburn Treatment
Goggles
Swim Caps
Wet Suits
Swim Skins
Chapter 3: Finding an Open Water Swimming Coach and Group
Finding Specific Coaches and Groups
Chapter 4: Technical Skills for Open Water Swimming
Swimming Skills Required
Breathing Drills
Head Position in the Water
Feeling the Water to Swim Faster
Chapter 5: Research
Selecting a Training Area
Scouting/Walking the Workout Course
Tidal Charts
Water Temperature
Water Quality
Food and Hydration
Chapter 6: Into the Open Water
The Stingray Shuffle
Water Entry
Bodysurfing
Waves
Surf
Role of the Tides
Swell Prediction
Moving through the Surf
Over Our Heads: Distress Signals
Riptides
Water Exit
Chapter 7: Effects of Heat and Cold
Cold Acclimatization
Hyperthermia and Hypothermia
Heat Acclimatization
Hypothermia
Ice Swimming
After-drop
Chapter 8: Sinuses and Ears
Prevention of Infections
Chapter 9: Ocean Hazards
Fog
Ships, Boats, Jet Skis, Sailor Boats, Windsurfers, Kite Surfers, and Surfers
PART TWO: BEGINNING AND INTERMEDIATE SWIMMERS
Chapter 10: Training Swims
Training Safely
Training for a Short Open Water Swim
Training for a Moderate or Long Open Water Swim
Chapter 11: Selection for Support and Swim
Skills Required for a Kayaker
Kayaker Selection
Kayaker Competency
Swimming Route
PART THREE: INTERMEDIATE AND ADVANCED SWIMMERS
Chapter 12: Open Water Swims Outside the Buoys with Boat Support
Information Gathering/Research
Selecting Support Crew
One Person on the Surface in Charge
Plan for the Swim/Mission
Briefing: Explaining the Plan
SEAL Mission Planning
Strategy
Backup Plans
Safety/Operational Risk Management
Emergency Action Plan
Completion of Swim and Rewarming
Further SEAL Advice When Planning a Swim
Medical Check Before Swim
Recommendations for Long Training Swims and Documentation
Chapter 13: Dangerous Marine Organisms
Research Semitropical and Tropical Waters before Swimming
Bristle Worms
Coral Reefs
Fire Coral
Jellyfish
Box Jellyfish
Leptospirosis
Seabather's Eruption
Sea Cucumbers
Sea Urchin
Seaweed Dermatitis
Scorpion Fish
Crown-of-Thorns Starfish
Stonefish
Stingrays
Country Medicine
Swimmer's Itch
SEALs Recommend U.S. Navy Diving Manual
Chapter 14: Sharks
Swimming with Sharks and Rays
Minds in the Water
U.S. Navy Diving Manual on Sharks
First Aid for Shark Bites
PART FOUR: ADVANCED SWIMMERS
Chapter 15: Into the Dark
Swimming in the Dark
Dark Swims and Illumination
Finding Better Illumination
Chapter 16: Seasickness
Taking Medications During a Swim
Chapter 17: Preparation
Physical Training
Mental Preparation
Chapter 18: Going In and Out of Consciousness
Deep Mind “Thing”
Sleep
Chapter 19: Motivations
Success
Success in Unsuccessful Swims
Chapter 20: The English Channel Charts, Contacts, and Pilots
Tidal Charts
Selecting a Training Area
Water Temperature
Water Quality
Food and Hydration
Chapter 20: The English Channel Charts, Contacts, and Pilots
Tidal Charts
You Want to Swim the English Channel?
How Do You Make Contact?
Selecting a Pilot
Chapter 21: Catalina and Other Channel Swims
The Catalina Channel Swim
The Santa Barbara Channel Swim
Finding Pilots for the Catalina Channel and Other Swims
Meeting with Pilots Before Hiring Them
Inspect the Boat Before You Swim
Before You Begin Any Channel Swim
Contact the U.S. Coast Guard
Staying Healthy
Boating Safety
Selecting Boat Support for an Organized Swim
Organized Swim Considerations
Chapter 22: Swimmer's Utopia
Ways to Improve Training and Support and to Build Trust among
Swimmers, Support Boats, and Physicians
Chapter 23: Stewardship of the Waters
Sources for Additional Information
Acknowledgments

Introduction
The extreme is more accessible than ever before. People who never dreamed of
venturing outside swimming pools, gyms, and manicured fields are venturing
into the open water. They are no longer content to swim mega-laps in the
swimming pool. They want to experience something new and more exciting.
They want to push themselves as far as their arms will carry them and grow
physically and mentally stronger. They want to feel what it's like to dream big,
train hard, reach far, and, through the course of these experiences, explore the
bounds of their inner and outer worlds.
Many people are entering the open water as a healthy way of escaping the
constant noise and distractions of the world. They are slipping away from their
computers, cell phones, and the barrage of daily information, and immersing
themselves in clear blue and emerald-green waters, where they can think,
meditate, and dream.
My primary reason for writing this book is to help people of all ages who are
swimming or want to swim in the open water. I wrote it for people who already
know how to swim and who are strong and competent swimmers; who have a
background in competitive swimming; or who have experienced open water
swimming with masters swimming groups, are triathletes, or have participated in
junior lifeguard programs or are beach lifeguards.
I wanted to share my love of open water swimming with people who enjoy the
feeling of being in the water and are eager to try new experiences and
challenges. Also, for people who like to read about the outdoors, adventure, and
nature, I wanted to provide a sense of what it's like to swim in the open water
and across channels. It's fascinating to read other people's journeys and learn the
lessons that they impart through their stories.
A large part of the manual is focused on our need to respect the power and
unpredictability of the open water and of nature; to understand that safety is
extremely important. Having qualified and knowledgeable support people and
reliable watercraft are essential for open water swimming.
This is a manual for swimmers and triathletes who want to learn specific
swimming skills and techniques for swimming in the open water. It will teach
you special stroke mechanics that will help you in the swimming pool and in the
open water. It also includes specific drills that will help you swim more
efficiently and safely in the open water. I've provided training ideas and swim
site suggestions. It includes information about ways to find open water
swimming and triathlon coaches as well as contact information for associations
that support channel swims.
The manual is divided into sections for beginning, intermediate, and advanced
open water swimmers. The information presented here is fluid, there is overlap,
and the topics are all interconnected. What applies to a beginning open water
swimmer also applies to intermediate and advanced swimmers. For example, the
steps a beginning open water swimmer would take to select a safe swimming
area are the same methods an intermediate or advanced open water swimmer
would use.
The sources of information for this manual include world experts: U.S. Navy
SEALs; scientists who specialize in the marine environment; physicians who
specialize in wilderness medicine, internal medicine, emergency medicine,
dermatology, and other medical experts; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration; the U.S. Coast Guard; current beach lifeguards, the American
Lifeguard Association, and the United States Lifeguard Association; and other
elite watermen and -women.
This book features open water swimming experiences and anecdotes from
some of the best open water swimmers in the world. There are also stories about
new open water swimmers and insights from triathletes who are currently
training and competing at all levels of triathlon.
This manual will help open water swimmers learn how to break down their
training into small segments and build upon their experiences, so that they can
enjoy the feeling of getting stronger, more competent, more confident, and go as
far as their bodies and minds enable them to go.
Just as U.S. Navy SEAL trainees use manuals to learn information pertinent to
becoming U.S. Navy SEALs, they must also work with elite SEAL instructors
who help them reach the high goal of becoming a SEAL (see Sources for website
address; this page). Similarly, this manual will give you the background
knowledge to help you swim in the open water, but like the SEAL trainees, you
need to train and to work with knowledgeable and qualified open water
swimming coaches and/or triathlete coaches, or experienced and successful open
water swimmers who can watch you swim on a daily basis, help you keep track
of your progress, and help you improve. Although open water swimming is
thought of as a solo sport, to really excel, you rely upon a team to help you
achieve your goals. And if you train with a group, you may find that it's even
more fun: a place where you give and gain inspiration and have longtime
friendships.
At this time, a directory for open water swimming coaches does not exist, but
there are well-established open water swim clubs and open water swimmers who
provide a way to network and find a coach to help with your open water
swimming. See Chapter 3 for guidelines for finding a coach and a team or club
in your area.
When swimmers enter the open water, they begin their own water journeys.
They are no longer swimming in a controlled area; they are entering a wild
world where everything is constantly changing. Heraclites, the Greek
philosopher, wrote, “You cannot step in the same river twice."
You will also discover that you cannot swim in the same river twice, and that
is what makes the sport of open water swimming so exciting. Each swim is
different the way the water feels, the way it looks, the way you feel when you
move through it. Each swim provides a different, often fascinating and
sometimes life-altering experience.
You will find that as you spend more time in the open water, the experience
becomes addictive in a good way, often a highlight of your day. Enjoy the water,
time with friends, time to gain strength, and time to float and think and dream of
near and distant horizons.

Open Water Swimming Manual

PART ONE
How to Begin

Chapter 1
Beginnings

ALLURE OF THE OPEN WATER
Oceans, lakes, rivers, ponds, and streams are some of the most beautiful places
on earth to swim. Nothing compares with breaking free from the confines of a
swimming pool and swimming in salty or sweet waters, as far as your arms will
carry you. You are immediately lifted by the water, bounced by the waves, and
massaged by the movement of your body through the water.
You feel sunshine warming your back, see shafts of sunlight illuminate the
water below, hear the song of the wind and the waves, and as you swim, you
hear the rhythms of your hands and feet as they catch and move water. You hear
the music of your body and your breath as the wind, current, swell, and tide
change, and the sounds of your body changing with it. You are immersed in this
water song, and each day it is different.
Each day is a great adventure. You never know what you will experience until
you get in and swim.
For forty years I have swum in the open water. At age fourteen I swam across
the Catalina Channel and, at age fifteen, broke the men's and women's world
records for the English Channel. Since then, I've completed sixty challenging
open water swims some were world-record swims, others were firsts, and all
offered unique, exciting, and interesting challenges.
The sport of open water swimming is exploding like jogging did in the 1970s
in the United States and Britain. There are more than nine hundred competitive
open water swims across the United States throughout the year. There is a
booming business in swim travel, in which swimmers travel to beautiful and
exotic places like Greece, Turkey, and the Caribbean and participate in open
water camps and swim along shore, between islands, and across straits.
The reason for this phenomenal growth in the sport may be because triathlon
and open water swimming have gained Olympic status, since 2000 and 2008,
respectively. According to the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association
(SGMA), an estimated 2.3 million people completed a triathlon in 2010, an
increase of 55 percent from the year before, and the New York Triathlon sold out
in eleven minutes despite an entry fee of just shy of nine hundred dollars (see
Sources for more information; this page).
Thomas Johnson, former president and current open water swim director of
the Triathlon Club of San Diego (see Sources for website address; this page), has
watched this amazing growth and was involved with organizing the 2012 ITU
World Triathlon San Diego, which served as the second qualifier for the 2012
U.S. Olympic Triathlon team. He predicted that the sport would expand even
more after the Olympic qualifying event and Olympic Games.
John Martin, the communications and media relations manager at USA
Triathlon, said there were 122,388 USA Triathlon members in 2000, and by 2012
there were 636,335 members. Martin said:
There are many reasons such as: society's interest in fitness and living
a healthy lifestyle, the growth of the number of total races across the
country, making events easier to get to, the growth in the number of
the more accessible shorter sprint distance races, which made the sport
more accessible to those with fewer hours to train each week, growth
in the 30-49 age groups who are looking for varied outlets for fitness,
an increase in the number of USA Triathlon clubs, which fosters a
community concept for men and especially women who enjoy the
group training and support atmosphere, an increase in resources
(websites, books, magazines) that provide assistance/education in
getting started, growth in multisport shops and triathlon-specific
training and racing gear, marketing and communications efforts of
USA Triathlon, the growth in the number of USA Triathlon certified
coaches who are able to provide training plans and individual attention
for athletes who need guidance and motivation, and USA Triathlon–
sanctioned 4,300 multisport events in 2011.
This enormous expansion of triathlon has had a huge impact on the growth of
open water because swimming is one of the races included in the triathlon. There
has been a dramatic increase in media visibility and interest in both triathlon and
open water swimming. Young swimmers are also participating in the sport,
especially those who have been involved in junior lifeguard programs. Some
university and college swimming coaches are incorporating open water swims
during long-distance winter training sessions, to give the athletes a break from
swimming thousands of mind-numbing meters in the pool. The swimmers are
enjoying the challenge of swimming in the wild blue waters. Young and older
swimmers who have spent years of their lives swimming back and forth in pools
are reading books and magazines about open water swimming and triathlons and
are inspired to swim in untamed water. They want to train, set open water
swimming goals, and discover ways to make the extreme environment of the
open water accessible for themselves.
Last year there were record numbers of people swimming the English Channel
(between England and Europe) and the Catalina Channel (between Catalina
Island and the mainland of California). The sport has become so popular that
British television now broadcasts open water swims during prime time.
What most athletes don't realize is that open water swimming is a high-risk
sport. This lack of awareness became very apparent to me on three separate
occasions. The first occurred when a swimming friend in Laguna Beach,
California, invited me to join him for an early dip. The fog was rolling in rapidly,
reducing visibility to three hundred yards. We decided to swim only one hundred
yards out to a buoy and then back in, because the fog was growing thicker, and
we knew there was a chance of getting lost, even close to shore.
We met four triathletes, two men who had trained in the area a few times and
two women who had never swum off that beach. They were planning to swim
out to the buoy, parallel the shore, and swim toward cliffs about a half mile and
back. One of the women asked if I would join them, and I said I didn't think it
was safe.
They were wearing wet suits and dark caps, and they set off into a rolling wall
of fog that quickly erased the sounds of their strokes and consumed them. Had
they considered what would happen to them if the fog suddenly grew thicker;
what they would do if they became separated or disoriented? Did they know how
to find their way back to shore? Did they realize that they were completely
invisible in the fog? Did they realize boaters and Jet Skiers wouldn't be able to
see them and could easily run over them? They were oblivious to the risk they
had taken or their responsibility to ensure the safety of their group. They were
lucky they made it back without a problem.
A few weeks later, a friend who was just learning how to swim in the ocean
was swimming parallel to shore outside the surf line. He had completed his
workout and was turning in to the beach to swim to shore.
He forgot that he needed to look back to check the surf conditions. He was
completely unaware that the dark blue long bump in the ocean was a wave
growing behind him. He did not realize that this wave was a shore break. He
suddenly felt the wave rapidly lifting him higher and higher and higher, tipping
him forward and launching him into the air. He felt himself falling and the water
rushing around him and suddenly pounding him into the beach.
He closed his eyes and felt himself flipping over the falls as tons of water
crashed onto his body. He spun around and tried to find air, but the white water
filled with sand was holding him under. His head finally broke the surface for a
moment, and he gasped for a breath and tried to get his feet under him, but
another wave, just as large, crashed on him and bounced him like a basketball on
the beach.
He was submerged for what seemed like forever, but at last he planted his feet,
stood up, and stumbled toward shore. The rip created by the backwash dragged
him backward into the path of the approaching wave.
For the first time, he glanced over his shoulder and saw the next wave
cresting. He leaned forward and, using his core strength, fought the backwash,
pushed hard into the sand with feet, and staggered out of the water, coughing, his
goggles twisted on his head, sand streaming down his face, shoulders, chest,
sides, and filling his swimsuit. He looked up at his friends who had run down the
beach to help him. He waved and smiled sheepishly and said he was okay. He
understood that he could have been severely hurt in the shore break.
Shortly after that, I watched another swimmer, in his midforties, swimming
off Seal Beach, California. He was breathing only on the right side of his body,
so he was completely blind on the left. Because of this breathing pattern, he
pulled stronger with his right arm than with his left. He had no spatial awareness,
no sense of ocean navigation, and he could not see that he was swimming right
into an area of heavy boating traffic. He had no idea that he was putting himself
in danger. He was okay once he reached shore.
It was because of these events and many others that I realized there needed to
be a book for all levels of open water swimmers, including those of us who have
been swimming in the open water for years but still have so much to learn.
Scientists, physicians, lifeguards, and other experts offered to provide key
information to help swimmers become more aware of the open water
environment and to know how to handle themselves in the water.

EXPERT SOURCES AND CREDENTIALS
Even though I'd completed swims in remote parts of the world and I'd worked
with various navies and coast guards to achieve my goals, I knew that there was
so much more to know about seamanship, risk management, and other topics
connected to open water swimming.
A friend in the United States Air Force offered to put me in touch with the
U.S. Navy SEALs. The SEALs are members of the United States Naval Special
Warfare unit, or NSW, who are trained for unconventional warfare; “SEAL” is
an acronym for “sea, air, and land.” NSW is the agency that provides units to
conduct maritime special operations, since the SEALs are America's elite
maritime force. They know more about operational risk management than
anyone; they are the experts in assessing, reducing, and mitigating risks. They
have established protocols that they abide by to ensure safety. They are experts
in seamanship, can work in teams, and know how to survive in the wildest ocean
conditions.
The SEALs welcomed me to their base in Coronado, California, to observe
their sessions with the trainees, instructors, and officers, to see the best in the
world train, to understand the way the elite force implements safety measures,
and to observe how everything is done in a completely professional way.
I was allowed to sit in during the instructors' discussions about the trainees,
which enabled me to understand the amount of planning, discussion, and
attention to detail that goes into each training evolution, or session. They
discussed everything in precise detail: how to initiate drills and exercises, how
long each one will last, how to ensure the trainees' safety, how often the trainees
hydrate, how frequently the metal scuba tanks sitting in the hot sun are cooled to
prevent the trainees from being burned. They reviewed how they would inspect
each trainee, what errors to check for, and the number of push-ups trainees
would do if they made a mistake. They also let me see the high-risk
documentation that ensured the trainees' safety. Equally important, the SEALs
let me see the level of qualification required by every instructor who supervises
a training event, whether it's something as simple as a run or as complex as a
dive.
The senior SEAL who contributed so much invaluable information, anecdotal
stories, and guidance cannot be named because he is on active duty, so I will
refer to him as L. Tadeus. His credentials are tremendously impressive. He
enlisted in the U.S. Navy, earned his commission as an officer, and spent
fourteen years working in the U.S. Navy SEAL teams—eight years operational
and six years in a high-risk training capacity, supervising almost every type of
high-risk maritime training conducted by Special Operations Forces (SOF). He
has spent three years specifically conducting physical training events, from 2-
mile to 5.5-mile (3.2-kilometer to 8.8-kilometer) swims and 4-mile (6.4-
kilometer) runs. He is a Combatant Dive Training subject matter expert;
Command Diving Officer and Diving Supervisor; Submersible Pilot/Navigator;
and Military Small Craft Operator. The SEAL is trained in all levels of
Operational Risk Management, is a Military Master Training Specialist (MTS)
9502 NEC, and has earned numerous civilian maritime certifications, up to and
including two-hundred-ton boats, and is a certified Captain Near Coastal
(International Yacht Training [IYT]).
Among L. Tadeus's many training credentials is an additional qualification
that made a huge difference to this manual. Like other senior SEALs, he has
analyzed and investigated accidents that occurred during training. When he was
not the actual Investigating Officer, he closely followed safety mishap
investigations in cooperation with his Command Safety Manager to ensure that
appropriate lessons were learned, and he institutionalized those lessons within
the training curriculum so that no one would have to relearn them the hard way.
He offered me many helpful illustrations of dangerous swim-training scenarios.
He provided recommendations for finding support boats and people, equipment,
and methods for incorporating risk management into open water swimming. He
also gave me pearls of wisdom that he earned and learned through challenging
experiences as a SEAL, an instructor, and a leader. He shared his knowledge
generously to help open water swimmers swim safely and to help them achieve
their worthy goals.
Rick Knepper also provided invaluable information. Rick is a sixty-three-
year-old retired Navy SEAL Master Chief who has spent the past forty-five years
with the Naval Special Warfare community, both for active duty and civil
service. He has spent approximately thirty years working within the SEAL
schoolhouse, with extensive time training SEAL candidates in all fundamental
aquatic skills and surface swimming for ocean swims up to five and a half
nautical miles. Additionally, he has been an aquatics trainer for numerous
instructors' staffs over the years and continues to fulfill this need when required.
He has revised and designed various aquatic programs with the SEAL training
pipeline and has served as an aquatics consultant with other navy organizations.
For the past twenty-five years, Rick has been swimming open water marathons.
At the age of fifty, he completed the Catalina Channel crossing and a local
twenty-four-mile sanctioned solo swim off San Diego. He is currently training
for a thirty-six-mile (57.9-kilometer) swim scheduled in 2013 off Coronado
Island.
His routine conditioning includes various open water training swims, with
several between fourteen and sixteen miles and occasionally up to twenty miles
(32.1 kilometers). A purist, he swims year-round off San Diego without a wet
suit, just a cap, goggles, and a swimsuit. He has served as the safety coordinator
on several twelve-mile (19.3-kilometer) swims and supported other open water
swimmers with their training and event goals. He contributed insights and
suggestions from many years of experience as a SEAL and as an instructor.
Visiting the SEAL base gave me the invaluable opportunity to watch the best
maritime special force unit in the world work with their trainees.
On a cool morning in March 2010 at the SEAL training base in San Diego,
California, Mark James, a SEAL instructor, invited me to join him and the
trainees in a classroom for a briefing before the trainees entered the water. The
briefing would inform the trainees what they'd be doing during their training
session and would answer any questions before they entered the water.
Mark James referred to a diagram of the swim course, beautifully drawn on a
large chalkboard. Point by point, he discussed the swim. He told the trainees the
water temperature was 58 degrees F (14.4 degrees C), that the surf was
negligible but the current to the north was strong. They would be swimming
parallel to the shore to the north for a nautical mile—two thousand yards. They
would get a strong current assistance to north, and they would need to work on
their navigation skills to hold a straight line to the buoy. Once they reached the
buoy, they would swim counterclockwise around the buoy and then back to the
base. This would be a timed swim, and they were instructed to stay within six
feet of their swim buddy, who was another trainee. They watched out for each
other.
Medical responders in a truck onshore had put a number of safety mechanisms
in place, so all the trainees had to do was focus on their training. Mark James
would be riding a Jet Ski, and there would be qualified instructors in an escort
boat alongside the swimmers. There would also be an emergency response team
on the beach, keeping pace with the swim the whole time. At some point during
the swim, the trainees would practice an emergency rescue drill. One swimmer
would be selected to simulate a swimmer in distress. The crew on the support
boat would convey to the medical responders onshore, in a truck, that there was
an emergency situation and then signal everyone involved in the training session
by using a smoke signal, or pulling smoke. The people in operations who
monitored all the training were reminded of the rescue drill and the fact that a
trainee would be pulling smoke.
When the boat and Jet Ski were in place, an instructor on the beach started the
SEAL trainees. Outfitted in wet suits, the trainees quickly entered the rusty-red
Pacific off Coronado Island, dove under small swells, and swam north using the
special combat swimmer's stroke, a modified sidestroke, that enabled them to
reduce their splash in the water and make them far less visible than freestyle.
The group quickly became a long line of swimmers moving parallel to shore.
The escort boat and Jet Ski support crew watched to make sure they all made it
around the buoy. As they swam quickly and efficiently, the responders in trucks
monitored what was happening. All their focus was on the trainees.
When the majority of the swimmers had nearly reached the finish of the swim,
the rescue drill was initiated, with the “stricken” trainee's buddy pulling smoke.
A white trail of smoke rose like a white line above the water and signaled the
men in the safety boat that a trainee was in trouble. The SEAL instructor on the
Jet Ski responded immediately. He moved carefully around the swimmers,
pulled up beside the swimmer who needed to be rescued, and with the help of
one other swimmer, he helped place the stricken trainee on a rescue sled. The
trainees who noticed the smoke shouted to the other swimmers to muster,
meaning they needed to get out of the water quickly and go to a designated area
where two other instructors could check their names off a list to account for
everyone.
Meanwhile, the Jet Skier came ashore through the surf and met the emergency
response team at the water's edge. They placed the victim on a spine board,
settled him in the truck, and transported him to the medical clinic on-site. The
team timed the drill and was pleased with the rapid response. After the training
session, the instructors debriefed, or discussed, the swim with the trainees and
went over questions. It was amazing to observe how the best in the world train
and how they put safety mechanisms in place. So much that is both seen and
unseen goes into planning a training session, so that all the trainees have to
worry about is performing.
It takes a certain kind of swimmer to want to venture beyond the cement walls
and enter a world that is as different from Earth as space. It takes someone who
is looking for something more challenging, that is constantly changing, that
makes her think about how she's being affected by the forces of nature, and how
she needs to use physical strength and mind to move through the open water.
It is a dramatic, exciting, and thrilling world, but in order to swim in the open
water, you need to be a strong, competent swimmer who can evaluate risks,
know how to mitigate them, and decide when it is safe to swim. It helps a lot if
you have swum on competitive teams or in masters programs, participated in
junior lifeguard programs, competed in triathlons, or played water polo. That is
not to say other athletes should not swim in the open water, but they need to
reach a certain level of competency before they venture into the surf, current,
and waves.
As in every sport, you need to begin with the proper equipment.

Chapter 2
Equipment

THE SWIMSUIT
For most swimmers, the essential apparel is a swimsuit. A number of swimsuit
manufacturers have designed suits that work well for open water swimming;
these include, in alphabetical order, Adidas, AgonSwim, Arena, Nike, Speedo,
and TYR. As with running shoes, there are a variety of swimsuits to choose
from; swimsuits are cut, sewn, and fit differently, and they are available in
different materials. It is worth taking the time to find a style that fits your body
and a fabric that works best for you.
The fabric matters. Some swimmers want a swimsuit that is stretchy, some
want one that is warmer, and some want a suit that is durable. Swimsuits are
available in three basic fabrics: Lycra, polyester, and spandex, as well as blends
of these fabrics. The amount of polyester and spandex and whether the fabrics
are knitted or woven make the difference in the way the fabrics feel.
Lycra swimsuits are the thinnest and have the most stretch. Swimming in a
Lycra swimsuit feels almost as if you're wearing nothing. The Lycra clings to
and moves with your body. The fabric allows you to feel the water.
Polyester and polyester/spandex blends are thicker, more durable, a bit
warmer, and less revealing than Lycra. They are also heavier and offer more
resistance in the water. That's why many pool swimmers train in heavier nylon
or polyester blends and wear lighter Lycra swimsuits for competitions. Lycra
swimsuits fade, and the material breaks down more quickly than polyester
blends, but in the chlorine-free open water, all swimsuit fabrics will have longer
lives.
The most important consideration when selecting a swimsuit is fit. If a
running shoe doesn't fit well, you'll get blisters; if a swimsuit doesn't fit well, it
will chafe. Salt water is very abrasive, and if you're swimming considerable
distances in the ocean, you will be chafed. For women, the areas that chafe the
most are along the seams of the suit, around the top of the suit, under the arms,
and around the leg holes. For men, swimsuits chafe along the seams, around the
top of the suit, and around the leg holes. Unfortunately, swimsuit manufacturers
construct swimsuits with the seams on the underside of the suit instead of on the
outside.
When Laura, my younger sister, and I began open water swimming—long
before the term was used to describe long-distance ocean or freshwater
swimming-we wore tough nylon swimsuits. The seams were thick and
abrasive, and after long workouts, the seams rubbed us red and raw; eventually,
the seams cut into our skin. Clothes and Band-Aids stuck to the cuts, and when
we changed clothes, we gently peeled off the scabs and often bled.
Our father, a physician, was very concerned about infection; our mother, an
artist who was very good at sewing, suggested that we invert our swimsuits. That
way, the seams would be on the outside of the swimsuit and not up against our
skin. Her idea considerably reduced chafing along the swimsuit seams, but we
were swimming long distances, and the