Science of
SWIMMING
FASTER

The training, technology,
and evolution of
extraordinary performance

Scott Riewald, PhD
Scott Rodeo, MD
Editors

Science of
Swimming
Faster

Scott Riewald, PhD
Scott Rodeo, MD
Editors

Human Kinetics

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Science of swimming faster / Scott Riewald, PhD, Scott Rodeo, MD, editors.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Swimming--Training. 2. Swimming--Physiological aspects. 3. Sports sciences--Juvenile literature.
I. Riewald, Scott A., 1970- II. Rodeo, Scott.
GV838.67.T73S45 2015
797.2'1071--dc23
2014045348
ISBN: 978-0-7360-9571-6 (print)
Copyright © 2015 by Scott Riewald and Scott Rodeo
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
xerography, photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is
forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.
This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information relevant
to the subject matter presented. It is published and sold with the understanding that the author and
publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, medical, or other professional services by reason of
their authorship or publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought.
The web addresses cited in this text were current as of March 2015, unless otherwise noted.
Acquisitions Editor: Tom Heine; Developmental Editor: Cynthia McEntire; Managing Editor:
Elizabeth Evans; Proofreader: Sarah Wiseman; Copyeditor: Bob Replinger; Indexer: Nan N. Badgett;
Permissions Manager: Martha Gullo; Graphic Designer: Kim McFarland; Cover Designer: Keith
Blomberg; Photograph (cover): Zuma Press/Icon SMI; Photographs (interior): Photos provided
by the authors, unless otherwise noted; chapter 20 photos © Human Kinetics; Visual Production
Assistant: Joyce Brumfield; Photo Production Manager: Jason Allen; Art Manager: Kelly Hendren;
Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn; Illustrations: © Human Kinetics; Printer: Sheridan Books
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book
excerpts can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human
Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
Website: www.Human Kinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia: Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 80, Mitcham Shopping Centre
South Australia 5062
0800 222 062
e-mail: info@hknewzealand.com
E5192

I would like to thank my wife, Suzie, and children, Maddox and Callie,
for all their patience, love, and support during the process of bringing
this book together. You bring me energy, and this project wouldn't
have happened without you.
-Scott Riewald
This book is dedicated to my wife, Christine, and children,
Sarah, Scott Jr., Caitlyn, and Mark, in recognition of their
unwavering love and support. They are the anchor that provides
perspective about what is truly important in life.
-Scott Rodeo

iv
Contents
Preface
...........vii
Part I
Swimming Mechanics and Technique
Chapter 1
Fluid Dynamics, Propulsion, and Drag . . . . . . . . ..3
Timothy Wei, Russell Mark, and Sean Hutchison
Chapter 2
Freestyle Technique
23
Ross H. Sanders and Carla B. McCabe
Chapter 3
Backstroke Technique
51
Russell Mark
Chapter 4
Breaststroke Technique
71
Russell Mark
Chapter 5
Butterfly Technique
87
Ross H. Sanders and Carla B. McCabe
Chapter 6
Techniques for Starts and Turns .
97
Andrew Lyttle and Brian Blanksby
Chapter 7
Analyzing Strokes Using Computational Fluid
Dynamics.
.......123
Matt Keys, Andrew Lyttle, Brian Blanksby, Liang Cheng,
and Koji Honda
Part II
Physiological Aspects of Training
and Competition
Chapter 8
Energy Systems and Physiology. .147
J.M. Stager, Jonathon Stickford, and Kirk Grand
Chapter 9
Periodization and Planning
.........173
Scott Riewald
Chapter 10 The Effect of Tapering on Performance
Iñigo Mujika and Andrew M. Stewart
Chapter 11 Competition-Day Strategies.
Scott Riewald
Chapter 12 Analyzing Elite Swimming Performances .......241
Jodi Cossor
Chapter 13 Overtraining and Recovery
Randall L. Wilber
Part III
Applied Sport Sciences
Chapter 14 Nutrition: Fueling for Performance.
Charlene Boudreau
Chapter 15 Performance Enhancers and Doping Control.... 305
Jennifer L. Reed and Andrew L. Pipe
Chapter 16 Swimming Psychology: Merging Mind and
Body.
James Bauman
Chapter 17 Growth and Development.
Anne Pankhurst
Chapter 18 Sports Medicine: Swimming Injuries
and Prevention.
Courtney Dawson and Scott A. Rodeo
Chapter 19 Sports Medicine: Illnesses and General Health
Margo Mountjoy
Chapter 20 Strength and Conditioning for Performance
Enhancement.
Scott Riewald
Part IV
Considerations for Special Groups
Chapter 21 Adolescent Swimmers.
Jordan D. Metzl and Morgan A. Busko
Chapter 22 Masters Swimmers
James W. Miller
Chapter 23 Female Swimmers
Jaci L. VanHeest
Chapter 24 Open Water Swimmers .
Steve Munatones
Chapter 25 Adaptive Swimmers
Brendan Burkett
References.
Index.
About the Editors
About the Contributors .
...........199
..............225
.......261
................285
......327
......353
........371
...381
...401
..............451
............467
...........489
...........501
...........525
...........549
...........578
...........589
...........591

Preface
Welcome to Science of Swimming Faster, a unique book that blends the
theory of sport science and medicine with practical application.
How many times have you read an article or book chapter describing some
aspect of sport science and swimming yet walked away asking, “How am
I supposed to apply this information with the athletes I work with?" Sci-
ence of Swimming Faster aims to break down that barrier and bridge the gap
between theory and practice-—providing just enough theoretical foundation
to show that the authors know what they are talking about before diving
in to discuss what the information means to the swimmer in the water, the
coach on the pool deck, or the parent in the stands.
The world of swimming has changed considerably over the past decade.
We have seen the introduction of revolutionary new suits that have had a
significant effect on performance. We've watched athletes take advantage
of performance-enhancing substances, sometimes legally and sometimes
illegally, to achieve a competitive advantage. We've seen modifications to
the ways that athletes and coaches approach training and stroke technique,
leading to faster and faster times. We are seeing increasing professional-
ization of swimming at the elite level. No stone is left unturned to achieve
peak performances, and more attention and importance are placed on such
areas as performance nutrition and sport psychology. Greater consideration
is given to dissecting stroke technique and analyzing race performances to
milk every drop of speed out of an athlete. It is true that as athletes get to
the Olympic level, everything affects performance. We are now seeing this
increased level of interest in the sport sciences and sports medicine funnel
down to collegiate, high school, and age-group swimmers as well as to
masters swimmers and triathletes. All swimmers seem to want to know
what they can do to swim faster and more efficiently, while staying healthy
and injury free. Science of Swimming Faster will help athletes and coaches of
all abilities gain scientific insights that will positively affect performance.
Purpose
If you perform a search of the research literature related to swimming, you
would quickly find hundreds of studies on myriad topics. But what can
you do with this information? Most coaches and athletes simply don't have
time to read and digest every research study that is published. Couple this
with the fact that scientific articles do not typically present information in
a user-friendly format, and it's easy to see why staying abreast of the latest
advances can become a frustrating endeavor.
But those studies contain a lot of good information—if only it could be extracted
and put in a format that is easy to understand and related directly to challenges
faced by coaches and athletes in the real world of swimming. Enter Science of
Swimming Faster. The information contained here is presented in an easy-to-
understand manner, using swimming terminology and examples that will be
familiar to coaches, athletes, and parents. Training suggestions and sample exer-
cises make the information real and usable right out of the box (or book). As an
added benefit to those who want to delve more deeply into a specific topic, each
chapter provides a comprehensive reference list that will direct you to the most
current research and publications.
Whether you are a coach, a swimmer who swims competitively, or a swimmer
who swims just to stay fit, you will benefit from the content in this book.
Content
Science of Swimming Faster is organized into four sections. Part I overviews the
technical aspects of swimming. Chapters are dedicated to understanding the
mechanics of swimming—that is, how swimmers generate propulsive force while
reducing drag—and looking closely at stroke-specific aspects of technique. These
chapters present the latest scientific information, from in-pool studies to computer
simulations of performance. Additionally, this section looks at new and emerg-
ing technologies and ways in which they can be used to dissect the intricacies of
stroke technique and improve in-water performance (chapter 7).
Part II focuses on training and competition. The question has often been asked,
"What is the best way to prepare for competition, and do I really have to train
three hours a day to compete in a race that lasts less than two minutes?" This
section of Science of Swimming Faster looks at how the body responds to training
and what can be done to prepare the body optimally for competition. Chapters
are dedicated to topics such as the physiology of swimming, planning and peri-
odization, and tapering. Information is presented about how elite athletes swim
their races and what coaches and athletes can focus on to improve performances
on race day.
Part III addresses other areas of sport science that have an effect on perfor-
mance—areas such as nutrition, sport psychology, and injury and illness pre-
vention. All these areas are important to swimming performance, but they are
sometimes swept under the rug in favor of focusing only on technique or training.
Also included is a chapter on growth and development and ways to maximize the
long-term development of swimmers. Growth and development is a theme that
weaves through almost every chapter in the book because it affects how athletes
should be viewed and trained. As has been stated many times, young athletes
are not simply small adults. How a coach trains a 10-year-old will differ dramati-
cally from what the same coach would do with a 20-year-old. Remember that no
matter how talented a 12-year-old is, he is not a fully mature Michael Phelps, and
he should not be trained in the same way.
Finally, part IV addresses special swimming populations like the female athlete.
We identify specific differences between males and females that coaches should
keep in mind when working with this group of athletes. Additional chapters are
devoted to masters swimmers, age-group swimmers, open water swimmers, and
adaptive swimmers. No other resource on the market attempts to consolidate this
type of information and present it in one place, let alone share ideas on how best
to work with these athletes on the pool deck.
All in all, this is a one-of-a-kind book, and we hope you enjoy it. We're confi-
dent that the information contained in Science of Swimming Faster will lead you,
whether you are a coach or an athlete, to new levels of performance.

This page left intentionally blank.

PART
I
Swimming
Mechanics
and Technique

This page left intentionally blank.

CHAPTER
1
Fluid Dynamics,
Propulsion, and Drag

-Timothy Wei, PhD, Russell Mark, and Sean Hutchison
It is fair to say that at some time in their lives, swim coaches, swimmers, and
swim parents (sweating in the bleachers of hot, humid swimming-pool
facilities) have contemplated and discussed what exactly the water does when
someone tries to swim through it. Over the decades, a language and a perceived
knowledge base have evolved across the swimming community about the fluid
dynamics of swimming. Although much of this understanding is sound, some
key elements are either incorrect or have been misinterpreted, resulting in inef-
ficient or counterproductive stroke technique.
The fluid dynamics of swimming is extremely complex. Understanding the
process is further complicated by the fact that seeing what the water is doing as
the swimmer goes by is not possible. Even worse, every swimmer is different.
What works well for one swimmer could be counterproductive for another.
The primary objective of this chapter is to provide a primer on the fundamentals
of fluid dynamics in the context of swimming. First, we cover the fundamentals,
discussing the physics associated with drag and thrust production in a way
that is rigorous and accurate without being daunting to the nonscientist. Next,
in the section “Force and Flow Measurement," we provide a brief description
of two of the state-of-the-art measurement techniques that have been brought
to the study of swimming. The section “Application to Swimming" contains a
discussion on the fundamental physics of the arm pull. The primary purpose
of this culminating section is to provide the reader with a practical example of
how the fundamentals of fluid dynamics can be applied to stroke analysis to
provide an accurate understanding of what constitutes good stroke production.
Ultimately, no stroke will be perfect, but we open here with the observa-
tion that every swimmer is competing with and against the same laws of fluid
dynamics. Understanding those laws in a practical way is crucial to developing
rational approaches to swimming fast.
The Fundamentals
To gain an understanding of the fluid dynamics of swimming, we need to start
with a discussion of some of the basic physical principles. When we discuss
scientific concepts, everyone in the conversation needs to understand the terms
we use. Words such as velocity, acceleration, force, and pressure have distinct mean-
ings, so they cannot be used interchangeably. In this section, we introduce the
key terms and concepts that we will need to know to gain a true understanding
of the fluid dynamics of swimming.
Newton's Second Law:
The Critical Balance Between Thrust and Drag
A saying in the academic engineering community is that every time you show
an equation, you lose half the audience. Unfortunately, mathematics is the
language of physics, so talking about the fluid dynamics of swimming is virtu-
ally impossible without using equations. Fortunately, in the case of swimming,
almost everything stems from a single equation: Newton's second law. In its
simplest form, we know it as
F = Ma
or force is equal to mass times acceleration. That is, in order for a body of mass,
M, to undergo an acceleration, a (i.e., to increase velocity with time), we need
to apply a force, F.
In real life, F is often not just a single force. Rather, it is the sum of a number
of forces acting on the body, sometimes simultaneously, sometimes at different
times. In swimming, for example, the swimmer pulls with her arms, kicks with
her legs, and possibly throws in some sort of dolphin motion. The forces created by
these body motions vary with time and do not all occur at the same time, though
presumably an elite swimmer has figured out how to coordinate these forces in an
optimum way to go as fast as possible. These propulsive forces are counteracted by
the resistance of the water to the swimmer's attempts to move through it.
We can classify the propulsive forces as thrust forces and those that oppose
motion as drag forces. We can rewrite Newton's second law as
thrust forces – drag forces = Ma
or for simplicity, let's just write it as
T-D = Ma
Here, T represents all of the propulsive forces and D represents all of the forces
that resist forward motion.
Note that when we write Newton's second law in this manner, we can draw
the following insights. If the thrust forces are larger than the drag forces (T >
D), the swimmer will speed up. If the drag is too great, the swimmer will either
slow down (D > T) or will have to work a lot harder (i.e., increase T) to maintain
speed. Finally, regardless of how fast the swimmer is swimming, at a constant
speed the thrust exactly offsets the drag (T = D).
In the context of swimming then, Newton's second law states that a competi-
tive swimmer needs to maximize thrust while minimizing drag. Maximizing
thrust comes from building strength and improving technique, and minimizing
drag is optimized primarily through adjusting body position in the water. We
will return to this thought at the end of this section.
Note that noncompetitive swimmers who swim primarily for fitness do not
need to worry about minimizing drag. The greater the drag is on the swimmer,
the more calories the swimmer will burn. Still, using those calories to go far or
fast and at less risk of injury is more satisfying.
The next step in this overall discussion is to explore in detail some of the fluid
dynamic principles associated with drag and thrust. Before doing that, however,
we need to throw another equation into the mix, Bernoulli's equation. This
equation relates pressure with flow speed, a concept important in applications
from airplane design to swimming.
Bernoulli's Equation
In 1738 Dutch-Swiss mathematician Daniel Bernoulli published the derivation
of an important relation that now bears his name. At its core, it is a mechanical
energy equation for fluid flows that relates the pressure and fluid speed at one
location in the flow to the pressure and speed at another location.
Derivation of the Bernoulli equation involves integrating the forces experi-
enced by a fluid particle as it travels along a streamline from one location to
another. In one respect, this is a pressure equation with units of force per unit
area or (mass / length / time²). The units of the terms in the equation also can
be viewed as kinetic energy per unit volume (mass × length² / time² / length³),
which becomes (mass / length / time²). That the Bernoulli equation is a mechani-
cal energy equation stems from the derivation and from the dimensions of the
terms in the equation.
In a somewhat simplified form, the Bernoulli equation is
Po = p₁ + 1/2 pV₁² = p₂ + 1/2 pV22
2
1
1
2
Here, p, p, and V refer to pressure, fluid density, and flow velocity, respec-
tively. The subscripts, and, refer to two arbitrary locations in the flow where
we might be interested in comparing pressure and velocity. The first term, po
represents what is known as either the stagnation pressure or total pressure. It is
the pressure that would result if it were possible to bring the flow to rest, that is,
V = 0.
The Bernoulli equation may be thought of as a mechanical energy equation;
that is, total mechanical energy in the fluid = potential energy in the fluid at some
location + kinetic energy associated with the moving fluid at that same location.
To understand this better, consider a highly pressurized tank of fluid. Initially,
the tank is closed. The fluid is at rest, and its pressure is as high as it will ever
be. When the tank is opened, the pressure starts to drop as fluid flows out. The
initial pressure in the closed tank is the total pressure, p. It is the maximum
potential energy (per unit volume) that the fluid will ever have.
When the tank is opened, fluid starts flowing out; a conversion of energy
occurs from potential energy to kinetic energy. Those familiar with physics
will recognize that the term in Bernoulli's equation, 1/2 PV₁2, indeed looks like
kinetic energy (1/2 MV², where M is mass and V is velocity). Because density, p,
is mass per unit volume, then 1/2 PV₁2 can be understood as kinetic energy per
unit volume of fluid. As such, this is probably the easiest term to recognize in
terms of physical meaning. We call this the dynamic pressure.
The remaining term, that is, the pressure in the fluid, p₁ (or p₂) in Bernoulli's
equation, corresponds to the potential energy of the fluid at those locations. This
works out to be the difference of the total pressure and the dynamic pressure.
Alternatively, this is the potential energy that remains after you convert some
of the maximum possible potential energy (the pressure of the fluid at rest)
into kinetic energy (hence the name, dynamic pressure). If the static pressure,
p₁ or p₂, were ever to drop to zero, that would mean that all the original energy
available in the flow had been converted entirely to kinetic energy; that is, this
is as fast as the flow could possibly go.
So, in summary, p is total energy, 1/2 pV₁2 is kinetic energy or dynamic pres-
sure, and p is the potential energy or static pressure remaining in the fluid as it
moves with speed, V. The Bernoulli equation provides a relationship between the
speed of the water flowing past some part of the body and the pressure of the water
at that point. For a competitive swimmer in a competition swimming pool, the
total pressure is constant. Thus, if the fluid slows down, the static pressure goes
up. If the fluid is moving quickly, then the static pressure in the high-speed fluid
will be low. Observe that if the flow speed changes by a factor of two, then the
static pressure will change by a factor of four because pressure varies as velocity
squared. Additionally, keep in mind that Bernoulli's equation applies under spe-
cific conditions (e.g., constant density fluids with no viscosity). For our purposes,
the general physical insight provided by this equation is extremely helpful. The
key point to remember is that if we are looking at two points in the flow, say, for
example, on either side of the hand, if the water is flowing faster over one side than
the other, then the pressure will be lower where the flow is faster. If the speeds
are the same on either side of the hand, the pressure will be the same as well.
Drag
We now turn to the forces acting on or generated by a body in water. Let's define
drag as any force opposing motion of a body or body part in a particular direction.
The three types of drag are pressure drag, viscous drag, and wave drag. Pressure
drag is also known as bluff body drag. As the alternative name implies, this is
most dominant when the body is not streamlined, or bluff. Consider for instance,
how you have to lean into the wind on a windy day, shown schematically in
figure 1.1. As the moving air approaches your body, it decelerates. And we know
from the Bernoulli equation that decreasing speed means increasing pressure.
Remember that pressure is force divided by area, or, conversely, force caused
by pressure is pressure multiplied by an appropriate area. It is incorrect, although
common, to use the terms pressure and force interchangeably. This error is perhaps
the greatest contributor to incorrect analysis and understanding of the fluid
dynamics associated with swimming.
Pressure Drag and Viscous Drag
In an ideal fluid, figure 1.1a, the flow would smoothly accelerate around your
body and then decelerate again as it passes around to your back. Note that in
this ideal case, the flow is symmetric front to back. From the Bernoulli equa-
tion, we would then expect that the pressure on the back of your body would
exactly return to the pressure on the front of your body. In this scenario, because
the pressure is the same front to back, you wouldn't feel any force pushing on
you. Fluid dynamicists refer to this situation as complete pressure recovery. The
concept that you could somehow move through the wind without feeling any
resistance is what is known as d'Alembert's paradox.
a
b
Figure 1.1 Schematic drawings looking down at a person standing facing into a
steady wind. Flow is from left to right. The ideal case is shown in (a) on the top, and
the actual case, (b), appears on the bottom.
In real life, of course, the harder the wind is blowing, the more you have to
lean into the wind to avoid being blown over. A great deal of turbulence (lots of
interacting vortices) is generated behind your body. The flow doesn't return to
being nice and smooth after it passes behind your body. Rather, what is called
a wake region is found behind your body, shown in figure 1.1b, and the pres-
sure immediately behind you does not return to the same level as the pressure
in front of you. Now a pressure difference is seen between the front and back
of your body; the higher pressure is in front, and the lower pressure is in back.
The net force acting against you is the pressure on the front of your body minus
the pressure on the back of your body multiplied by the projected frontal area
of your body, represented mathematically as
pressure drag = (Pfront - Pback) Afront
The projected frontal area is the area of the silhouette that would be formed if
someone were to shine a spotlight from behind you with you standing facing a
wall. That frontal area would naturally be the same whether you were standing
facing the wall or standing with your back to the wall. Because Pfront is larger than
Pback, you feel the wind pushing you backward as you try to move forward into it.
This phenomenon is called pressure drag or bluff body drag. If the body shape
does not allow the flow to travel smoothly from front to back, then pressure
drag will be significant. If, however, the body shape permits smooth flow all the
way around, if the body is streamlined like a wing, then pressure drag will be
minimal or nonexistent. That does not mean that the drag will be zero. All real
fluids are viscous, which means there is always a frictional resistance to motion
through or by a fluid. To visualize this, think about a brand new deck of cards.
Imagine that you set the deck on a flat horizontal table and place the palm of
your hand flat on top of the deck. Now imagine sliding your hand horizontally
to the right, as shown in figure 1.2. If the cards were perfectly frictionless, they
would not sense the motion of your hand and the entire deck would stay put. In
figure 1.2, the deck set on the table appears as dark rectangles with light edges.
The deck after the application of the sliding force, F, is shown as grey rectangles.
Clearly, if no friction were present, the before and after pictures would be identi-
cal and look like figure 1.2a.
In reality, some amount of friction is present between your hand and the
top card, between the table and the bottom card, and between the individual
adjacent cards in the deck. In that case, when your hand moves parallel to the
table top, the top card moves with your hand, the bottom card sticks to the
table, and all the cards in between move by varying amounts depending on
how close they are to either the table or your hand. This concept is illustrated
in figure 1.2b. The closer the cards are to your hand, the more they will move.
The closer they are to the table, the less they will move. The card closest to the
table is held in place by the frictional force between the table and that card. The
top card experiences a frictional force imparted by the movement of your hand,
which drags it forward at the same speed as your hand. Each card in between
the top and bottom cards experiences a force pulling it forward from the card
above and a resisting frictional force imparted by the card below. In the end,
the entire deck starts to lean.
Think of viscous or frictional drag in a similar fashion. Instead of playing
cards, think of the rectangles in figure 1.2 as imaginary layers or laminates of
fluid. Think of the tabletop as a streamlined body, say a wing on an airplane. In
this analogy, we would be sitting inside the airplane looking out the window.
The wing looks as if it is stationary, and the air is flowing over the wing from left
to right. If the flow were frictionless, as shown in figure 1.2a, the grey rectangles
would all shift to the right by an equal amount like a giant cardboard box being
blown along the wing. The picture for viscous, or frictional flow, figure 1.2b,
however, would be exactly the same as it was for the deck of cards. The layer of
air closest to the wing would stick to the wing and move with the wing. From our
vantage point looking out the window, it would appear as if it were stationary.
Far away from the wing, the air would simply blow on by. In the region referred
to as the boundary layer the air speed would vary from zero at the boundary out
to the speed at which the plane is flying. This boundary layer region is typically
very thin. Over the wing of a large commercial airliner, it could be only a few
inches (5 to 10 cm) thick before the air passed over the trailing edge of the wing.
Wave Drag
The third form of drag relevant to swimming is wave drag. Probably the simplest
way to gain a conceptual understanding is to remember that as a body moves
through any fluid, a bow wave forms in front of the body. For a boat or a swimmer,
this wave is clearly visible. Below a certain speed, the bow wave sits in front of
the swimmer and the swimmer is essentially swimming uphill, trying to get on
top of the wave but never getting there. This phenomenon is known as wave drag.
For every object, there is a critical speed at which it is possible for the object
to climb up on top of the bow wave. This speed is known as the hull speed. The
formula for calculating the speed at which a body can overcome its own wave
drag is
Vhull = 1.248 × √H
where Vhull is the hull's, that is, the swimmer's, speed in meters per second and
√H is the square root of the height of the swimmer expressed in meters.
When Vhull is achieved or exceeded, the swimmer is in a sense surfing her own
bow wave. When this happens, the wave drag drops dramatically and the speed
can increase equally dramatically. To visualize this, think of a motorboat when
you first try to get it to go as fast as it can and then when it later gets to high
speed. When you first push the throttle forward, the hull is deep in the water.
The bow rides very high, the back of the boat is very low, and the boat essen-
tially plows through the water. When the boat speed exceeds its hull speed, the
boat rises out of the water and can accelerate to high speeds by planing across
the top of the water.
The reason that wave drag is so interesting is that the hull speed of a human
swimmer turns out to be right around the same speed as world-class swimming
speeds. As a rough estimate, suppose a swimmer is about 2 meters tall; his hull
speed would be 1.76 meters per second. This speed translates to a 56.7-second
time in a 100-meter race. We are, of course, neglecting the start and turn, but
you will notice that only a relatively few swimmers can swim faster than this.
So the next time you are watching an elite-level race, watch how high or how
low the swimmers are in the water. If you are watching the preliminary heats, you
will probably notice that on average the faster swimmers ride higher in the water
whereas the slower swimmers are lower in the water. Of course, other variables
such as percentage and distribution of body fat will cause certain swimmers to
float higher or lower. The polyurethane and neoprene body suits that were used
in 2008 through 2009 were extremely helpful to many swimmers in terms of
buoyancy. They automatically sat higher in the water and gained much of the
benefit of overcoming wave drag without having to generate the speed necessary
to overcome it.
As a quick summary up to this point, the three forms of drag experienced by
a swimmer are pressure or bluff body drag, viscous or friction drag, and wave
drag. Pressure drag and wave drag are the dominant forms of drag in swimming.
Friction drag dominates only for very streamlined bodies such as airplanes or
animals that depend on high-speed swimming or flight for survival. In those
cases, friction becomes dominant not because frictional drag increases but
because the pressure drag is extremely small, by virtue of body shape. Note that
fish and birds typically do not move at the air or water interface like competi-
tive swimmers do. As such, their wave drag is zero. In any event, swimmers can
do little to eliminate viscous drag. Their focus needs to be on optimizing body
position to reduce pressure drag and optimizing stroke production to maximize
thrust. Swimmers need to be constantly winning the battle between thrust and
drag by both maximizing thrust and minimizing drag.
Thrust
With this thought in mind, let's spend some time on the fluid dynamics of
thrust. The underlying question in this discussion is, What must a swimmer
do to make the water move in such a way as to generate as much thrust (i.e.,
speed) as possible?
Two thrust generation mechanisms are dominant in competitive swimming:
the thrust associated with the pull of the arms and vortex-induced thrust in
which body motions create an organized system of vortices that effectively pump
fluid along the axis of the body. A third mechanism derived from wing theory
gave rise to the S stroke popular in the 1960s and 1970s that continues at the
club level today. Because of the legacy surrounding the S stroke, we will examine
the underlying aerodynamic theory to provide a framework for comparing the
straight pull with the S stroke.
Actually, a variety of physically accurate ways can be used to explain each of
the thrust production mechanisms. For ease of comparison, the best approach
is to use a single physical concept and relate each of the mechanisms to that
concept. Consider the example of an ice skater standing on a smooth sheet of ice
holding a ball of significant mass. At some instant in time, the skater brings the
ball to his chest and throws it by pushing it away from his chest. You have likely
heard of the law of equal and opposite reaction or possibly the conservation of
linear momentum. In this example, when the skater throws the ball forward,
he ends up being propelled backward. How much or how fast each one moves
depends on their relative weights (or to be precise, their relative masses). If the
ball happens to be a small balloon filled with air, the balloon will move and the
skater's backward motion will be negligible. But if the ball were the same weight
as the skater, each would move an equal distance in their respective directions.
If the ball were as heavy as a train locomotive (let's not worry about how he
manages to pick it up), it would be the skater who moves backward.
The takeaway from this example is that to propel himself forward, the swim-
mer must somehow take as much water as possible and throw it along the axis
of his body past his feet. This action will propel him forward in the water. The
trick is that water doesn't come in easily grabbed balls.