How to Swim Faster: a Holistic Training Guide
SWIM
LIKE A PRO
FARES KSEBATI
FOUNDER OF WORLD SWIM DAY & MYSWIMPRO

SWIM LIKE A PRO
How To Swim Faster: A Holistic Training Guide
FARES KSEBATI

Copyright © 2021 by Fares Ksebati
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods,
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law.
Edited and formatted by L. Austen Johnson

SWIM LIKE A PRO BONUS VIDEO COURSE
I truly believe that the best way to learn something is through multiple touch
points. That's why I created an online video course that corresponds with this
book.
I have created a unique video for each chapter that will aid in your
learning. You'll be able to see and hear my explanation for each concept and
stroke technique in this book. Seeing a visual representation of each concept
can make all the difference in how fast you make progress, so I highly
recommend you join the online course.
You can get started right away by visiting swimlikeapro.org or by
opening the camera app on your phone. Hold your phone over the QR code
below. Your phone will automatically direct you to the website where you
can follow the instructions to unlock all the video content.

ONLINE COURSE
L
SCAN THE CODE
TO SWIM LIKE A PRO

VIDEO LIBRARY
WORKOUTS
Q&A

PREFACE
A Love Letter To Swimming
THE FEELING OF WEIGHTLESSNESS is unlike anything I've experienced in my
life. When I'm swimming, it feels like I've entered a different world. It's as if
I've been transported to another dimension. The world's problems just
disappear, and I become one with the water.
It's Magical.
When I first dive in, all my senses awaken, and I experience something
that transcends imagination. The water tingles along my skin, bringing my
senses to life. I hear the molecules of water echoing inside my eardrum as I
submerge below the surface. I can smell the water, fresh and natural, and
even get a little taste with my lips.
It's truly a one-of-a-kind experience, and nothing else will engage all my
senses like the feeling of being in water. After all, we as humans are 60%
water, so it's a bit like coming home. But there's something more to this
experience than becoming one with the water, a medium that covers most of
the world's surface area. There's something about the feeling of
weightlessness that is special, and it is this feeling that is one of the many
joys the sport of swimming offers humanity.
Think of your body as a vessel. When you start to swim, every part of
your body works together to move your vessel forward. Some body parts and
energy systems work harder than others. Your heart beats faster to pump
blood to your muscles, while your stomach slows down because digestion is
no longer a priority.
After about two minutes, your body realizes that you're not stopping
anytime soon and goes into aerobic respiration. Your body starts to supply
even more oxygen to your muscles. Your heart beats faster and stronger to
circulate this oxygenated blood through your body!
Our brains love swimming too! The extra blood and oxygen circulating
help you become more alert, awake, and focused. When we swim, our brain
releases endorphins, natural, “feel good” hormones. When you swim, your
mind can be just as engaged as your body, and as a result, your future self
will thank you.
There is no question that swimming is the best all-around form of
physical fitness for all. It's the only form of physical activity that you can do
from cradle to grave. The water has no racial, national, or religious
boundaries. Young, old, rich, poor, from anywhere around the world, we are
all working towards the same goals.
Together we share a passion for the water. Whether you swim for sport,
physical fitness, or mental health, whether you swim in a pool, lake, river, the
sea, or the ocean, we are all in this together!
It's that feeling of weightlessness, competitive spirit, and pushing
ourselves further and faster! It's the positive endorphins we feel after
reaching the wall, crossing the finish line, or looking in the mirror knowing
you're a badass for diving in and taking on the world!
This is why I swim!
Since my early childhood, I developed a great passion for the water. The
freedom and enjoyment we experience as swimmers is often hard to describe.
My experience in the water has empowered me to help others realize this
same feeling of freedom.
I believe through structured guidance, data, and social interaction, we are
all just one day away from realizing our full potential! Aquatic prowess is the
epiphany of reaching your full potential in the water.
In 2015, I launched MySwimPro, a fitness app to help swimmers all over
the world improve their performance and health. The idea for the app was to
have a personalized swim coaching experience at a fraction of the cost of
hiring a coach. MySwimPro has grown to over one million community
members. Our mission is to democratize swimming by making improvement
easier and more accessible to all swimmers.
Through the development of this global swimming business, I've had the
opportunity to speak with thousands of swimmers around the world about
their goals, fears, and dreams in the sport. I've interviewed dozens of
olympians, world record holders, and industry experts on everything from
strength training to nutrition.
I've written thousands of personalized workouts and training plans for
swimmers with highly diverse backgrounds and goals. The results are
absolutely incredible! From helping people lose over 100lbs to crossing the
finish line at their very first triathlon, the impact has been palpable.
Before launching MySwimPro, I coached both age-group and masters
swimmers. I truly enjoyed the opportunity to help people improve their
techniques and reach their goals. After the 2016 Olympic Trials, I
transitioned to coaching only masters swimmers to allocate more time to
growing MySwimPro. It's an amazing experience to share the knowledge I
have gained as a former collegiate swimmer with people of all skills and
experience levels.
As a swimmer myself, I still compete in masters competitions, open water
races, and in triathlons. I've competed in the FINA Masters World
Championships, swam from Asia to Europe in the Bosphorus Cross
Continental swim, and am a 3x U.S. Masters swimming individual national
champion. I'm always on the lookout for the next swimming adventure, and
in this book, I'll tie in relevant stories for added flavor and entertainment.
This book is the culmination of over a decade of on-deck coaching
experience, 20+ years competitive swimming knowledge, and over five years
building the largest digital swimming community in the world!
I am incredibly excited to package all this knowledge into one book that
takes a holistic approach to helping swimmers reach their goals. Please also
visit swimlikeapro.org for this book's special online companion course that is
filled with instructional technique videos and other resources to help you
swim smarter.
This is THE most comprehensive way to swim faster and smarter than
ever before. There is only one question I have for you:
Are you ready to swim like a pro?

CONTENTS
Introduction
I. Warmup:
The Fundamentals
Chapter 1
What Happens to Your Body When You Swim
Chapter 2
The Physics of Swimming
Chapter 3
How to Write a Swim Workout
II. Main Set
Swimming Technique
Chapter 4
Technique 101
Chapter 5
Freestyle
Chapter 6
Backstroke
Chapter 7
Breaststroke
Chapter 8
Butterfly
Chapter 9
The 5th Stroke
III. Main Set II:
Out of the Water
Introduction
Chapter 10
Strength Training
Chapter 11
Injury Prevention
Chapter 12
Nutrition
Chapter 13
Mental Training
IV. Cool Down:
Swim for life
Chapter 14
Why We Swim
Chapter 15
How To Get Started
Chapter 16
My Gold Medal Moments
v. Appendices
Appendix I: Swimming Glossary
Appendix II: Frequently Asked Questions
About MySwimPro
About the Author
Swim Like a Pro Online Video Course
Get Custom Stroke Analysis & Coaching
Acknowledgments

NIM

INTRODUCTION
You feel it the moment you enter the water. Your heart pounds, your muscles
contract, and your lungs tighten up! A few minutes later, you've moved
beyond the initial temperature shock and floated into a world where
swimming is almost as comfortable as walking.
Throughout this book, I'll share a methodology that has been used by
thousands of swimmers around the world to improve stroke technique and
swim more efficiently. I'll walk you through a holistic approach that will
allow you to swim with less effort, swim faster, and swim with more
enjoyment than ever before.
If you're just getting started in your swimming journey, this couldn't be a
better time to start! The resources I'll share in this book and the online course
will not only expose you to the fundamentals of technique training but also
the world of strength and conditioning, nutrition, and injury prevention.
Before we get started, I'd like to share with you the five core promises of
this book and my intentions behind them. Each promise is my commitment to
you. If you approach this book and the methodology I share with an open
mind, you will be in a significantly better position to take your swimming to
the next level.
PROMISE #1: A FRESH Perspective On SwimMING
Albert Einstein is widely credited with saying, "The definition of insanity is
doing the same thing over and over again but expecting different results." If
you want to maximize your potential in something, you must approach it with
a fresh perspective. Whether you've been swimming for 30 years or just
getting started, I promise that this book will help expand your outlook on
every aspect of swimming. We will start by self-reflecting on why you swim
and how to prioritize your goals and create a plan of action to reach them!
PROMISE #2: A Deeper Understanding of Stroke TechnIQUE AND
TRAINING
Water is 784 times more dense than air! It is a medium that offers its own
unique physical challenges unlike anything we experience on land. For this
reason, we must take a scientific approach to understanding the physics of
how our body moves through the water. I promise to present to you a detailed
technical overview of all five strokes: freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke,
butterfly, and the underwater dolphin kick. Additionally, I will share
workouts and video demonstrations in the complementary online course.
PROMISE #3: A STRAtegy to Set SMART GOALS
A goal without a plan is just a wish. If you make a wish to Santa to swim
faster, he may or may not deliver. You should still leave him milk and
cookies just in case. In this book, I promise to share drills, training guidance,
and a strategy to build on the technical knowledge for each stroke we discuss.
You will learn how to set SMART Goals that are specific, measurable,
attainable, and time-bound. You will put together an action plan and join a
global community of swimmers who are focused on improving their
performance and health!
PROMISE #4: A HOLISTIC APPROACH TO Swim SmartER
If you want to swim faster, you have to swim more. This is false. Instead, I
will share how to swim smarter and incorporate both in-water and out-of-
water training to enhance your performance and make the most of your time.
We will discuss how these elements come together and why it matters if
you're looking to take your swimming to the next level!
PROMISE #5: TO BE INSPIRED

We all have our own unique motivations to swim. Perhaps you're looking
to reach a personal best time, or maybe, you aspire to swim in an open water
race or triathlon. Maybe you're looking to improve your stroke technique and
burn more calories. Regardless of your goal, you're not alone. Swimming is
special. We have a global community of individuals who have achieved
incredible progress and made strides to what I like to call “Gold Medal
Moments."
You don't have to win gold to achieve something great! In this book and
supplemental video interviews, you will hear from people just like yourself
who are working towards their personal goals and finding success. I believe
that we are all just one step away from achieving our Gold Medal Moment.
We just need the right guidance, structure, and support to make it happen.
I can't promise you'll break a world record or hit a new PR, but with the
resources presented in this book and online course content, you'll be well on
your way to swimming with more efficiency and greater confidence in the
water.
So how will we do this?
A Holistic Approach
I want you to think about your favorite high performance sports car.
Maybe you like exotic Italian supercars like Lamborghini or Bugatti. Perhaps
you're a fan of classic American Muscle cars or new age electric. Regardless
if you fancy a Ferrari or a Tesla, all these automobiles have one thing in
common.
They've all been engineered to be the best at something while still being
great at everything else. Similarly, the best swimmers in the world share the
same fundamentals of stroke technique, training, and race strategy. The best
swimmers approach swimming from a holistic perspective in order to
optimize every element of the human machine. Fast cars and fast swimmers
have a lot more in common than you might think.
At the core of a car's performance is the engine. An internal machine that
converts one form of energy into another for forward motion. When it comes
to swimming, we have the unique opportunity to train and develop our
engines. We can even make our engines more efficient to improve our range.
Instead of fuel economy, we have something called swimming economy, i.e.,
how efficient we are at swimming. Remember, we are a vessel moving
through the water. What good is a powerful engine if it's not working
efficiently?
The fastest cars also have the least wind resistance. Similarly, as a
swimmer, it's our job to decrease drag and limit our resistance with the water.
Unlike a car moving through air, we move through water, a medium that's
800x denser than air.
When it comes to stabilizing the machine, just like a performance car,
you can't load a massive engine on a weak frame. Similarly, we as swimmers
must have a strong core to hold our alignment in the water and support
forward progress.
Just like a car, some features are essential; others are not. The shiny rims,
heated seats, and carbon fiber accents are cosmetic features that might be
flashy, but at the end of the day, they're simply just nice to have. In
swimming, you can think of these cosmetic features as your swimsuit color,
cap, goggles, and equipment.
There are so many possibilities to customize, but the core of the machine
is what's on the inside. For the car, that's the engine, transmission, chasis,
and internal computer system. For swimmers, this would be our stroke
technique, endurance, and knowledge of the sport.
By the end of this book, you'll have the knowledge and know-how to go
on auto-pilot. But I don't recommend swimming on autopilot. After all, the
fun of driving a car is being in the driver seat, and swimming is no different!
When you're in the driver's seat, you're in control. Let's rev our engines
because this joy ride is about to start!
Book Structure
This book is broken up into four core sections that flow from one to the
other. We'll start with the fundamentals of swimming by discussing the
physics of how to swim faster and how to structure a workout. Then, we'll
dive (pun intended) into each major stroke with a full overview of the proper
mechanics. Each chapter in this section will share the proper technique for
the corresponding stroke along with supplemental online content that will
feature instructional video drills.
In the second half of the book, we'll step out of the water to teach skills
that will supplement your swimming training. We'll look at how to approach
swimming as a lifelong sport. I'll share goal setting strategies, how to get
started, and personal stories from my swimming adventures around the
world.
Are you ready to SwIM LIKE A PRO?
Let's dive in :)

WARMUP:
The Fundamentals

CHAPTER ONE
What Happens to Your Body When You Swim
WE AS HUMANS have five basic senses: touch, sight, hearing, smell and taste.
Different parts of our body and the sensing organs associated with each sense
(like our tongues, for example) send information to the brain to help us
understand and perceive the world around us. In the water, we have a sixth
sense.
Yes, we all have a sixth sense, and I'm not talking about the 1999 thriller
movie starring Bruce Willis. Our sixth sense has more to do with body
awareness and our “feel” of the water. This feeling of connection with the
water is different than our sense of touch.
If you've been swimming for any consistent period of time, then you've
probably already developed a love-hate relationship with your feel of the
water. If you're new to swimming, this is your opportunity to start this
relationship off on the right foot!
This is important because when we understand how our feel of the water
develops, we will have better insight into how to improve it. Having a greater
awareness of your touch, sight, hearing, smell, taste, and feel of the water
heightens your swimming experience. When you swim with all your senses,
you improve most quickly, swim more efficiently, and you feel more alive!
Finding your Swimming Zen
I'm not a Zen monk, nor do I plan to become one. However, we can learn
and gain insight in the way monks try to live their lives. Simplicity,
mindfulness, calm, peace. These are all principles we can learn from.
We can all learn to make our swimming more Zen-like by following a
few simple guidelines. One of these principles is simplicity-to do one thing at
a time. Do one thing, and do it slowly and deliberately. Do it completely.
In life, we often overwhelm ourselves with more than we can handle. In
swimming, unfortunately, we behave in a similar manner. There's so many
things to think about in the water. Push off in streamline, point your toes,
blow bubbles out of your nose, keep your core tight, take a break out stroke,
don't let your hips drop.
There are literally hundreds of small movements and decisions that you
can think about just from pushing off the wall and taking your first stroke.
Regardless of how many things you could be focusing on, the key to
improving is to simplify and focus on one skill at a time. In this book and
online course, you will read about and see hundreds of different techniques,
drills, and strategies.
If you try to apply all these skills at one time, you will most surely
become frustrated and give up. It's important to take a systematic approach.
Lead with simplicity. Do less, space it out, designate time for mastering
certain skills, and think about what has the highest impact for you.
In order to find your swimming zen, it's important to keep everything in
perspective and go with the flow. Remember, the water is 800x denser than
air. You can't fight the water; you will surely lose. Instead, be patient, stay
positive, and try your best to enjoy the feeling of weightlessness.
"The water is your friend.....you don't have to fight with water, just
share the same spirit as the water, and it will help you move.” -
Alexandr Popov
Swimming Zen DrilL:
The next time you go to the pool, try this fun and simple drill. I'd like you
to enter the water feet first, fully submerge yourself so your entire body has
had a chance to get wet, including your head.
Next, I want you to focus on relaxing your body by focusing on lowering
your heart rate.
Focus on your breathing. Breathe in your nose, out your mouth. Don't
hyperventilate, just breathe normally and calm your body. Think of this as a
meditative exercise to clear your mind. Then when you're ready, drop your
face in the water and float on your stomach. Let your arms float where
they're most comfortable, and try to get your chest and hips high in the water.
You may want to inform the lifeguard what you're doing so they don't
look over and have a panic attack when they see you floating on your
stomach in the shallow end! Assuming you're able to float for a few seconds,
try to relax your body, clear your mind, and find your swimming zen.
"The mind is like water. When it's turbulent, it's difficult to see. When
it's calm, everything becomes clear." - Prasad Mahes
Body Awareness
Body awareness is the ability to recognize where your body is in space.
This could be on land or in the water. In the swimming world, a strong sense
of body awareness allows someone to time their final stroke into the wall at
the finish of a race or figure out at what point to somersault on the wall for a
freestyle flip turn.
Your muscles and joints send your brain information about your body and
how it moves through the water. You may wonder why good body awareness
is important to swimming fast. Body awareness helps us to understand how to
connect our body to the water.
It's pretty easy to spot the level of a swimmer's body awareness at the
pool. A beginner swimmer might take unnecessary strokes very close to the
wall or have an irregular breathing pattern. Both of these traits are very
common, and if this is you, no worries at all. We can change that by
improving our body awareness in the water.
Even for more advanced swimmers, improving body awareness can help
you swim faster, get a better more effective workout, and enjoy the sport
more. Body awareness develops quickly throughout childhood development
because research indicates that the multi-sensory foundations of the body
develop throughout early and mid-childhood.
If you learned how to swim as a teenager or adult, you can still learn and
develop these skills, it just takes time. The more time you spend in the water,
the more you'll improve. So remember to be patient and focus on finding
your swimming zen!
Be one with the water!
Proprioception
Proprioception is the body's mysterious ability to locate our limbs, in the
water or even in darkness. You could call it body sense or kinesthetic
awareness; it is the brain's ability to sense the relative positions and
movements of our different body parts. Because of proprioception, you know
exactly where your hand is in space as you move it around, even though your
eyes are closed.
You can test your own proprioception to see how this works. Take this
book or any object and hold it out in front of you with both hands. Now close
your eyes. Continue holding the book out in front of you with one hand, and
use your other hand to touch your nose. Now return your hand back to the
book. Pretty easy, right?
Now let's make things a bit more challenging. Repeat this process of
holding the book out in front of you and close your eyes. Touch your nose,
now instead of returning your hand to the book, touch the back of your head
and then give yourself a pat on the back. Now, without opening your eyes, try
to return your hand to the top of the book where you started...
It's not as easy as you'd think. Good thing you patted yourself on the
back first, because you probably missed returning your hand to the book.
When we close our eyes, our sense of the world and our body's place in it
doesn't disappear. An invisible impression remains. This sense is what
proprioception is.
Like our other senses
vision, hearing, and so on it helps our brains
navigate the world. Scientists sometimes refer to it as our “sixth sense.” As
you could tell from the last activity, you may or may not have been
successful at keeping your limbs in check while your eyes were closed.
This is because our brain maps our movements like the map of a road.
When you travel the same path over and over, a new mind map is created.
These maps are constantly being updated to reflect current demands. You can
instantly sense changes in your maps by doing a simple experiment.
Try to imagine or sense the exact shape and position of your ears. Now,
rub just the left ear for a few seconds and then compare your ability to sense
the left ear and the right. You will note that it is much easier to sense the left.
The simple reason is that touching the ear sent a signal to your brain, which
activated the map for that area. Of course, the additional clarity is only
temporary.
Similarly, when we swim, we create maps in our mind of how each stroke
is supposed to work. Everything from the timing of how our fingertips enter
the water to the way our muscles engage at each part of the stroke. We
reinforce our own habits without even knowing it.
This is why it's so important to swim with proper stroke technique. Every
stroke we take is an opportunity to refine and reinforce our mental framework
for how to swim. In order to make long-term or permanent changes in the
maps, you need to consistently place demands on that map over a long period
of time.
For example, musicians actually have larger finger maps than other
people. When a certain body part or movement is used repeatedly in a
coordinated and mindful fashion, there are actual physical and observable
changes in the part of the brain that controls that body part or movement.
This is part of the reason why you get better at what you practice. Lack of
movement will reverse this process. If you fail to move in a certain way for a
period of time, you lose the ability to accurately sense and control that
movement. This is called sensory motor amnesia.
If we swim three to four times per week and then take an 8-week break
from swimming, the brain's body map will become fuzzier and less clear.
We'll feel as if we've “lost our feel of the water.” There are ways to limit this
impact and better maintain this feel of the water outside of the pool which
we'll discuss in later chapters.
When it comes to improving our “feel of the water," we must be
consistent in our approach. Developing our feel of the water takes time. It
even has a compounding effect that's not linear. Each day we swim, and with
each stroke we take, we refine our mind and body's connection with the
water.
Out of the water, we can maintain and even accelerate these mind maps
through functional dryland training. We'll go in detail on how we can do this
in chapters nine and ten when we discuss swimming specific strength training
and injury prevention.
Whether you're training in or out of the water, your rate of improvement
starts with your intention. In order to re-calibrate your neural network so you
can swim faster, you have to be willing to re-shape your approach. I advise
looking at each new skill and workout with a fresh perspective.
You must engage both your mind and body in the water. Use all your
senses to work together to help you reach your goals.
"The mind controls the body, and the mind is unlimited." - Craig
Townsend
All Your Senses
When we're in the water, it's amazing how every muscle in our body is
sending information to the brain at the same time. Our nervous system
processes a massive amount of sensory data without any conscious work on
our part.
Just think what it takes to push off the wall in streamline. All the muscles,
from your fingertips to your toes, need to relay the right information at the
right time so you can keep all the bones of your spine in line. Next, in order
to start kicking in that position, you'll need to engage muscles in your core
and legs at just the right timing to keep forward momentum. When you break
streamline for the first stroke, your hand connects with the water in order to
create forward propulsion for the rest of your body.
It's amazing what the brain is capable of. We've already discussed our
"sixth sense,” but we skipped over the core five that we're most familiar
with, our senses of touch, sight, smell, hearing, and taste. All of these are
important in swimming.
Touch
The average person has nearly 20 million skin cells on their body. When
we go swimming, we get nearly 20 million interactions with the water all at
the same time! That's insane!
If you ask anyone what sense is most engaged during physical activity,
they would most likely say the sense of touch. I would agree! Our sense of
touch is our primary connection to the water. It goes deeper than the surface
(pun intended) of our skin, all the way to engagement on a neuromuscular
level.
Sight
"The eyes are the window to your soul." - William Shakespeare
I think Shakespeare was trying to be deep with that quote, but in all
reality, our eyes do offer us the opportunity to connect with the world around
us. Our visual memory describes the relationship between our perception of
what we see in the present moment and how it relates to what we've seen in
the past.
If we imagine ourselves in the water, just think of everything we see and
how it relates to our swimming—he transparency of the water, the depth of
the bottom, where the backstroke flags are: There are so many visual cues we
use to orient ourselves at the pool or in open water.
Smell
The next time you're at the pool or beach, pause and take in the scent of
your environment. It may sound primitive, but it will open not just your
nostrils but your mind, too. The sense of smell (called the “olfactory” sense)
is closely linked with memory, probably more so than any of our other
senses. The scent of chlorine conjures up recollections of a childhood
summer swim team practice, for example.
Hearing
While our echoic memory only lasts 2-4 seconds, we immediately
become aware of familiar sounds that we hear. Similarly to our sense of
smell, our hearing is highly associated with long-term memory. Hearing the
sounds of the ocean, a starting beep at a swimming competition, or even the
sound we make when we push off the wall and blow bubbles out of our nose
can all connect us to the water.
Taste
If you've been open-water swimming, you know the clear difference in
taste between a salty sea or ocean and a fresh-water lake. You don't have to
actually drink the water you swim in to know what it tastes like, and let me
be very clear, DO NOT drink the water that you swim in! Now that we've
gotten that out of the way, the sense of nostalgia associated with these
different tastes can have a large impact on how we interpret the environment
we're in.
By using all our senses, we can not only gain a greater appreciation for
the water but also become more mentally and physically engaged with a
workout. The more in tune we become with our environment and senses, the
faster we can create mind maps that will improve our performance in the
water.
Now that we understand how all our senses can work together, let's
discuss the physics of swimming so we can swim faster and smarter than ever
before!
"When you change the way you look at things, the things you look at
change" - Max Planck, the father of quantum physics

CHAPTER TWO
The Physics of Swimming
THIS CHAPTER IS GOING to blow your mind!
That's a bold statement! Please allow me to explain why I'm so confident
that what I'm about to share with you will have a massive impact on your
ability to swim more efficiently. I'm going to share exactly how you swim
faster. No tricks, gimmicks, or games.
Everything I will share is relatively simple to grasp, backed by science,
and can be applied to literally every level of swimmer! Is this too good to be
true? Is this Insanity?
"Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting
different results" - Albert Einstein
So, it's technically not insanity, but it would be considered insanity to
continue doing the same thing you're currently doing and expect different
results! The remarkable thing is that this methodology is not that
complicated.
If we break it down, there are only two ways to actually swim faster:
1. Decrease drag.
2. Increase propulsion.
That's it! It's as simple as that. There's no other way to swim faster.
Okay, so that's it?? I don't need to finish the book?!
No. It's simple, but it's not THAT simple! In this chapter, I'll get into the
science behind how the human body actually moves through the water. We'll
talk about fluid dynamics at a super high level and why it matters. Finally,
I'll share HOW you actually swim faster using the swimming equation.
The Laws of Physics
Physics dominates the world around us! We usually don't go about our
day thinking how gravity, momentum, and acceleration impact our lives. On
the flip side, we intuitively ignore some of life's most fascinating
phenomena. For example, the Earth is rotating 460 meters per second,
roughly 1,000 miles per hour. If that's the case, then why aren't we flying off
the face of the planet?
Consider this, air has a density of about 1.2 grams/liter, and water has a
density of about 1kg /liter. Air is therefore about 830 times less dense than
water. When we swim, it doesn't actually feel 830 times more difficult than
walking....well, sometimes it does :)
Swimmers that have a deep understanding of swimming science will be
able to master their efficiency and hone their craft. Understanding the science
of swimming will help you be more efficient and learn how to better use your
time and energy in the water.
How To Float
Science can explain just about every aspect of swimming. Why do some
swimmers float and others sink like a rock?
Swimming relies on the nearly-neutral buoyancy of the human body. On
average, the body has a relative density of 0.98 compared to water, which
causes the average person to feel weightless in the water.
When you're in the water, you float because the water pressure pushes
upward and balances your weight. We all have different buoyancies that are
determined by our body composition based on how fat and muscle is
distributed across our body.
In order to float in water, a person must be less dense than the water.
Everyone can float! Some swimmers have a much more difficult time
mastering this skill than others due to differences in body composition, but I
can assure you that everyone can float!
It doesn't matter how "strong" you are or how "lean" your frame is, you
can do it! Recall back to finding your zen; that's why this is really important.
You must first be calm, relaxed, and willing to "let go” in the water. If
you tense up, it simply will not work, and you'll sing like a rock. If you're a
more advanced swimmer, floating efficiency is still crucial because it allows
you to tap into your fine motor skills that allow you to swim with less effort
and gracefully float above the water as you swim!
Drag
As I mentioned at the start of the chapter, there are only two fundamental
ways to swim faster: by decreasing drag or increasing propulsion. Let's first
discuss decreasing drag because this will allow you to improve the most in
the shortest amount of time.
At some point in our lives, we've stuck our hand out the window of a
moving car and noticed the changes in air resistance based on how our hand
was positioned. If we keep our hand parallel to the ground, we'll feel less
wind resistance than if we hold it perpendicular with our fingertips pointing
to the sky.
This same concept applies in the water as well. In fluid dynamics, drag
(sometimes called resistance) is the force acting opposite to the relative
motion of the object (our body) with respect to a surrounding fluid (water).
Without getting too much into the weeds (or bubbles), just know that the
movement of the