SWIMMING
Anatomy
IAN MCLEOD
Your illustrated guide
for swimming strength,
speed, and endurance


Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
CHAPTER 1 - THE SWIMMER IN MOTION
Freestyle
Butterfly
Backstroke
Breaststroke
Dryland Training Programs
Dryland Training for Young Swimmers
CHAPTER 2 - ARMS
Standing Double-Arm Triceps Pushdown
Dumbbell Kickback
Close-Grip Push-Up
Close-Grip Bench Press
Medicine Ball Chest Pass
Tate Press
Barbell Biceps Curl
Dumbbell Biceps Curl
Concentration Curl
CHAPTER 3 - SHOULDERS
Forward Dumbbell Deltoid Raise
Lateral Dumbbell Deltoid Raise
T Exercise
Dumbbell Shoulder Press
Bent-Over Reverse Dumbbell Fly
Prone T, Y, A (Blackburn)
Scapular Push-Up
Scapular Dip
Internal Rotation With Tubing
External Rotation With Tubing
Crabwalk
Overhead Single-Arm Bounce
CHAPTER 4 - CHEST
Push-Up
Feet-Elevated Push-Up
Medicine Ball Push-Up
Barbell Flat Bench Press
Dumbbell Physioball Bench Press
Barbell Incline Bench Press
Dip (Chest Version)
Standing Double-Arm Medicine Ball Throw Down
Supine Medicine Ball Partner Pass and Catch
Wheelbarrow
CHAPTER 5 - ABDOMEN
Hollow Hold
Watch TV
V-Up
Flutter Kicks
Physioball Crunch
Cable Crunch
Seated Physioball Abdominal Hold
Russian Twist
Kneeling Chop
Physioball Prayer Roll
Physioball Upper-Trunk Rotation
Physioball Jackknife
CHAPTER 6 - BACK
Chin-Up
Pull-Up
Lat Pull-Down
Standing Straight-Arm Pull-Down
Double-Arm Seated Machine Row
Bent-Over Single-Arm Row
Standing Zeus
Lumbar Extension
Physioball Back Extension
Physioball Prone Superman Progression
Physioball Prone Streamline
Physioball Bridge
CHAPTER 7 - LEGS
Back Squat
Single-Leg Squat
Dumbbell Step-Up
Lunge
Standing Hip Internal Rotation
Standing Hip External Rotation
Romanian Deadlifts (RDLs)
Physioball Hamstring Curl
Leg Curl
Leg Extension
Band Lateral Shuffle
Standing Hip Adduction
Inversion and Eversion Ankle Band Strengthening
CHAPTER 8 - WHOLE-BODY TRAINING
Single-Arm Lawn Mower
Burpee
Block Jump Start Into Streamlined Position
Band-Resisted Start
Box Jump
Diagonal Cable Column Lift
EXERCISE FINDER
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

SWIMMING
ΑΝΑΤΟMY
Ian McLeod
Human Kinetics

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McLeod, Ian.
Swimming anatomy / Ian McLeod.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-7571-8 (soft cover) ISBN-10: 978-0-736-09385-9 (soft cover)
1. Swimming--Training. 2. Swimming--Physiological aspects. 3. Aquatic sports injuries. I. Title.
GV837.7.M37 2010
797.2'1--dc22
2009016094
ISBN-10: 978-0-736-09385-9 (print)
ISBN-10: 0-7360-8627-7 (Adobe PDF)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-7571-8 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-8627-1 (Adobe PDF)
Copyright © 2010 by Ian A. McLeod
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or by
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography,
photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without the
written permission of the publisher.
This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information relevant to the
subject matter presented. It is published and sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are
not engaged in rendering legal, medical, or other professional services by reason of their authorship or
publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional person should be sought.
Acquisitions Editor:Tom Heine; Developmental Editor:Leigh Keylock; Assistant Editor:Laura
Podeschi; Copyeditor:Bob Replinger; Permission Manager:Martha Gullo; Graphic Designer:Fred
Starbird; Graphic Artist: Tara Welsch; Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg; Photographer (for illustration
references): Neil Bernstein; Photo Asset Manager:Laura Fitch; Visual Production Assistant:Joyce
Brumfield; Art Manager:Kelly Hendren; Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn; Illustrator
(cover):Jennifer Gibas; Illustrators (interior):Jennifer Gibas and Becky Oles; Printer:United Graphics
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book
excerpts can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human
Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.HumanKinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada:Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe:Human Kinetics
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
Australia:Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8372 0999
e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
North Shore City
Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
E4563

CHAPTER 1
THE SWIMMER IN MOTION
Swimming Anatomy is both a visual guide to the role of the musculoskeletal
system in the four competitive swim strokes and a catalog of swimming-oriented
dryland and weight-room exercises. The exercises in the text will help you
maximize your performance and gain a competitive edge. Specific examples will
help you choose exercises that target the most-used muscles for each stroke,
starts, and turns to ensure that you are getting the best results from your
program. Included are exercises that may help you prevent injuries by
strengthening key stabilizing muscles and decreasing muscle imbalances. To
help you understand how these exercises enhance performance, descriptions of
the roles that various muscles play in propelling a swimmer through the water
and guidance in using selected exercises to target those muscles are included.
This chapter features an overview of the primary muscles used in the kicking
motions and during the pull-through and recovery phases of freestyle, butterfly,
backstroke, and breaststroke. The chapter also addresses some strength and
conditioning principles and how they relate to designing a swimming-specific
dryland program. Chapters 2 through 8, organized according to major body
parts, each contain exercises with accompanying illustrations and easy-to-follow
descriptions and instructions. The anatomical illustrations that accompany the
exercises are color-coded to indicate the primary and secondary muscles and
connective tissues featured in each exercise and swimming-specific movement.

Primary muscles
Secondary muscles
...
Connective tissues
Swimmers face several unique challenges that athletes in most land-based
sports do not encounter. The first challenge is the total-body nature of all four
competitive strokes, which involve movements of both the upper and lower
extremities. A coordinated effort of the musculoskeletal system is required to
keep each body part moving correctly to maximize efficiency of movement
through the water. To visualize this coordinated effort, think of the body as a
long chain and each body segment as a link in the chain. Because all the
segments are linked together, movement in one segment affects all the other
segments. This linkage, commonly referred to as the kinetic chain, allows the
power generated by the arms to be transferred through the torso to the legs. But
if a link in the chain is weak, a loss of power transfer can occur, bodily
movements can become uncoordinated, and the risk of injury can increase.
Another unique demand of swimming is that swimmers are required to create
their own base of support. Unlike land-based athletes, who have a stable surface
to push off from, you have to generate your own base of support, because most
training takes place in a fluid environment. The key to linking the movement of
the upper and lower extremities in the water, and at the same time generating a
firm base of support, is a strong and stable core. The core is best thought of as
the foundation on which the muscles of the upper and lower body are built. Even
a strong and well-designed house will eventually deteriorate if the foundation is
weak.
Without a doubt, swimming itself is the most effective way to become a better
and faster swimmer, but several components outside the water play an important
role in how you develop as a swimmer. One of those is a well-designed dryland
program based on an appreciation of the relationship between the body's
muscular framework and stroke mechanics. While engaged in swimming,
muscles primarily function as either the mover of a body segment or a stabilizer
of a body segment. An example of a muscle functioning as a mover is the
latissimus dorsi, commonly known as the lats, moving the arm through the water
during the propulsive phase of all four competitive strokes. The near-constant
activity of the core abdominal musculature is a prime example of a group of
muscles functioning as a stabilizing mechanism. Both functions are vital to
proper stroke mechanics and efficient movement through the water. Descriptions
of the muscle recruitment patterns for each of the four strokes are categorized as
those that are active during the propulsive phase, the recovery phase, and
kicking.
Throughout the exercise descriptions in the subsequent chapters you will see a
series of five icons, one for each of the strokes and one for starts and turns. The
purpose of these icons is to identify the exercises that are particularly well suited
to a specific stroke or starts and turns.

freestyle
backstroke
breaststroke
butterfly
starts and turns
Freestyle
As the hand enters into the water, the wrist and elbow follow and the arm is
extended to the starting position of the propulsive phase. Upward rotation of the
shoulder blade allows the swimmer to reach an elongated position in the water.
From this elongated position, the first part of the propulsive phase begins with
the catch. The initial movements are first generated by the clavicular portion of
the pectoralis major. The latissimus dorsi quickly joins in to assist the pectoralis
major. These two muscles generate a majority of the force during the underwater
pull, mostly during the second half of the pull. The wrist flexors act to hold the
wrist in a position of slight flexion for the entire duration of the propulsive
phase. At the elbow, the elbow flexors (biceps brachii and brachialis) begin to
contract at the start of the catch phase, gradually taking the elbow from full
extension into approximately 30 degrees of flexion. During the final portion of
the propulsive phase the triceps brachii acts to extend the elbow, which brings
the hand backward and upward toward the surface of the water, thus ending the
propulsive phase. The total amount of extension taking place depends on your
specific stroke mechanics and the point at which you initiate your recovery. The
deltoid and rotator cuff (supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and
subscapularis) are the primary muscles active during the recovery phase,
functioning to bring the arm and hand out of the water near the hips and return
them to an overhead position for reentry into the water. The arm movements
during freestyle are reciprocal in nature, meaning that while one arm is engaged
in propulsion, the other is in the recovery process.
Several muscle groups function as stabilizers during both the propulsive phase
and the recovery phase. One of the key groups is the shoulder blade stabilizers
(pectoralis minor, rhomboid, levator scapula, middle and lower trapezius, and the
serratus anterior), which as the name implies serve to anchor or stabilize the
shoulder blade. Proper functioning of this muscle group is important because all
the propulsive forces generated by the arm and hand rely on the scapula's having
a firm base of support. Additionally, the shoulder blade stabilizers work with the
deltoid and rotator cuff to reposition the arm during the recovery phase. The core
stabilizers (transversus abdominis, rectus abdominis, internal oblique, external
oblique, and erector spinae) are also integral to efficient stroke mechanics
because they serve as a link between the movements of the upper and lower
extremities. This link is central to coordination of the body roll that takes place
during freestyle swimming.

Like the arm movements, the kicking movements can be categorized as a
propulsive phase and a recovery phase; these are also referred to as the downbeat
and the upbeat. The propulsive phase (downbeat) begins at the hips by activation
of the iliopsoas and rectus femoris muscles. The rectus femoris also initiates
extension of the knee, which follows shortly after hip flexion begins. The
quadriceps (vastus lateralis, vastus intermedius, and vastus medialis) join the
rectus femoris to help generate more forceful extension of the knee. Like the
propulsive phase, the recovery phase starts at the hips with contraction of the
gluteal muscles (primarily gluteus maximus and medius) and is quickly followed
by contraction of the hamstrings (biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and
semimembranosus). Both muscle groups function as hip extensors. Throughout
the entire kicking motion the foot is maintained in a plantarflexed position
secondary to activation of the gastrocnemius and soleus and pressure exerted by
the water during the downbeat portion of the kick.

Butterfly
The primary difference between freestyle and butterfly is that the arms move in
unison during butterfly whereas reciprocal movements take place with freestyle.
Because butterfly and freestyle have the same underwater pull pattern, the
muscle recruitment patterns are almost identical. As with freestyle, the
swimmer's arms in butterfly are in an elongated position when they initiate the
propulsive underwater portion of the stroke. Muscles active during the entire
propulsive phase are the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi, which function as
the primary movers, and the wrist flexors, which act to maintain the wrist in a
neutral to slightly flexed position. The biceps brachii and brachialis are active as
the elbow moves from being fully extended at the initiation of the catch to
approximately 40 degrees of flexion during the midpart of the pull. Unlike in
freestyle, a forceful extension of the elbow is emphasized during the final
portion of the pull, resulting in greater demands being placed on the triceps
brachii. As in the freestyle stroke, both the rotator cuff and deltoid are
responsible for moving the arm during the recovery phase, but the mechanics are
somewhat different. Butterfly lacks the body roll that aids the recovery process
during freestyle; instead, an undulating movement of the torso occurs, which
brings the entire upper torso out of the water to aid in the recovery process.
Again, the shoulder blade stabilizing muscles are extremely important,
because they function to provide a firm anchor point for the propulsive forces
generated by the arms and help reposition the arms during the recovery phase of
the stroke. Although butterfly lacks the body roll present in freestyle, the core
stabilizers are still important in linking the movements of the upper and lower
extremities and have an important role in creating the undulating motion that
allows the swimmer to get the upper torso and arms out of the water during the
recovery process. The undulating movement is initiated with contraction of the
paraspinal muscles that run in multiple groups from the lower portion of the
back to the base of the skull. This contraction results in an arching of the back, at
which time the arms are moving through the recovery process. Contraction of
the abdominal muscles quickly follows, which prepares the upper body to follow
the entry of the hands into the water to initiate the propulsive phase of the stroke.
As with the arms, the muscles used in generating the kicking movements
during the butterfly kick are identical to those used during the freestyle kick; the
only difference in kick mechanics is that the legs move in unison. The propulsive
downbeat begins with contraction of the iliopsoas and rectus femoris, acting as
hip flexors. The rectus femoris also initiates knee extension, and associated
firing of the quadriceps muscle group further aids in extension of the knee. The
gluteal muscle group drives the recovery phase of the kick. Concomitant
contraction of the hamstring muscles also works to extend the hip. The foot is
maintained in a plantarflexed position through a combination of the resistance
from the water and activation of the gastrocnemius and soleus, acting as
plantarflexors. The dolphin kick that is used at the start of the race and off each
turn wall recruits a larger group of muscles than the smaller, more isolated kick
tied into the arm movements. Besides the movements generated at the hips and
knee, the dolphin kick ties in the undulating movements of the torso through
activation of the core stabilizers and the paraspinal musculature.

Backstroke
Although backstroke is unique in body positioning among the competitive
strokes, the stroke phases can still be divided into a propulsive phase that
consists of hand entry into the water, a catch component, a finishing component,
and a recovery phase. Rotation at the shoulder puts the hands in a position in
which the little finger is the first to enter the water. Combined with extension of
the elbow, the swimmer is in an elongated position to begin the underwater
propulsion phase of the stroke. A difference between backstroke and freestyle or
butterfly is that the initial catch component is dominated by the latissimus dorsi.
The pectoralis major makes a smaller contribution. Despite these differences the
latissimus dorsi and the pectoralis major are still the prime movers and are active
to some degree throughout the entire propulsive phase. Although the wrist
flexors are still an integral part of the entire propulsion phase, the wrist is
maintained in a neutral to slightly extended position. Through a combination of
pressure forces from the water and activation of the biceps brachii and
brachialis, the elbow transitions into approximately 45 degrees of flexion at the
start of the catch. By the end of the catch the elbow may be flexed as much as 90
degrees just before transitioning into the finishing component. As with the
finishing component in butterfly, more emphasis is placed on forceful extension
of the elbow, placing high demand on the triceps brachii during the final portion
of the propulsive phase.

The role of the stabilizing musculature during backstroke is similar to the role
that it plays in freestyle, largely because of the similar reciprocal arm movement
and the integration of body roll into both strokes.
The kicking motion seen in backstroke is a combination of movements that we
have seen in freestyle and butterfly kicking mechanics. Like freestyle,
backstroke uses reciprocal kicking movements. The major difference is that the
position of the swimmer causes most of the force to be generated during the
upbeat portion of the kick as opposed to the downbeat in freestyle. Backstroke
also uses the dolphin kick off the start of a race and off each wall. The muscle
recruitment patterns are the same in each case; the only change is in the direction
because of the swimmer's body position.

Breaststroke
As with the other strokes the arm movements that take place during breaststroke
are categorized as a propulsive phase and a recovery phase. The propulsive
phase begins with the shoulders and arms in an elongated overhead position. The
first half of the underwater pull is similar to that used in freestyle and butterfly.
The clavicular portion of the pectoralis major starts the movement, and the
latissimus dorsi quickly joins in. During the second half of the pull, forceful
contractions of the pectoralis major and latissimus dorsi pull the arms and hands
into the midline of the body to finish the pull. The forces generated during the
final phase are directed toward forward propulsion of the swimmer in the water
and upward propulsion of the swimmer's torso, which is aided by contraction of
the paraspinal muscles. This movement brings the swimmer's head and
shoulders out of the water. Flexion and rotation at the elbow bring the hands to
the midline of the body and mark the conversion into the recovery phase. To
return the hands to the starting position, the arms must be returned from their
position under the chest. This motion is carried out by recruitment of the
pectoralis major, anterior deltoid, and the long head of the biceps brachii, which
all function to flex the shoulder joint. At the same time, extension of the elbow
by the triceps brachii results in completion of the recovery phase, and the arms
return to their extended and elongated position.
As with the other strokes, the shoulder blade stabilizing musculature is crucial
to creating a firm base of support for the movements and forces generated by the
arms. Like the butterfly stroke, the breaststroke lacks a body roll component.
Even so, the core-stabilizing musculature is important in ensuring an efficient
linkage between the movement patterns of the upper and lower extremities.

Like the arm movements, the kicking mechanics can be divided into a
propulsive phase, consisting of outsweep and insweep components, and a
recovery phase. The propulsive phase begins with the feet hip-width apart and
the knees and hips in a flexed position. The outsweep is initiated with outward
rotation of the feet, which is accomplished by a combination of movements at
the hip, knee, and ankle. After the foot has been turned outward, the outer
sweeping motion is continued by extension of the hip and knee. The gluteal
musculature and the hamstrings function to extend the hip, and the rectus
femoris and quadriceps act to straighten the knee. At the transition from the
outsweep to the insweep, the knees and hip are still not completely extended, so
the respective muscle groups continue their action into the insweep component
until the knees and hip are fully extended. At the start of the insweep the legs are
in an abducted position, generating an opportunity for force production through
rapid adduction of the legs. The legs are brought back together by contraction of
the adductor muscles that run along the upper portion of the inner thigh. To
minimize drag during the final portion of the insweep, the calf muscles are
activated to bring the foot and ankle into a pointed position. Recovery is
accomplished by recruitment of the rectus femoris and iliopsoas, which serve to
flex the hip, and recruitment of the hamstrings, which serve to flex the knee.

Dryland Training Programs
Although this book is not intended to give full program design details and
guidelines, it does provide you with an understanding of how each exercise can
directly benefit you as a swimmer, which in turn can help you make better
decisions when choosing exercises for a specific program design. For example,
if your program calls for an exercise that targets the triceps, you have many to
choose from in chapter 2. We will, however, lay out some general principles and
ideas for training programs here.
You should be aware of several considerations when designing a dryland
program. The repetitive nature of swimming predisposes swimmers to
developing muscle imbalances. Muscles such as the latissimus dorsi and
pectoralis major become overdeveloped in relation to the smaller muscles that
make up the scapular stabilizers (particularly the middle and lower trapezius and
the rhomboids). In the lower extremity the quadriceps and hip flexors often
become dominant over weaker hamstrings and gluteal muscles. These muscle
imbalances not only lead to strength imbalances but also may create flexibility
and postural imbalances that can predispose you to injury and inhibit optimal
performance. So when designing a dryland program you should include a
flexibility component. Recent findings in the realm of flexibility training are that
dynamic stretches and movement patterns are an effective way to prepare for an
exercise session. Dynamic movements and stretches can be designed to
incorporate whole-body movements that can serve as an effective low-intensity
warm-up while also addressing areas of inflexibility. Further attention can be
given to tight muscle groups through static stretching at the conclusion of the
dryland program.
Careful consideration needs to be given to selecting the proper exercises. Two
concepts that can help guide exercise choice are transference and isolation.
Transference is the ability of an exercise to strengthen muscles in a manner that
will benefit a certain skill or task, in this case swimming. Transference can be
further divided into direct and indirect forms. Direct transference involves
choosing an exercise because the associated movements are directly related to a
certain component of one of the major strokes. An example would be using the
physioball prone streamline exercise (see page 136), because it directly mimics
the streamlined position that swimmers hold off their starts and walls. Indirect
transference involves choosing a certain exercise because the targeted muscle
groups are similar to those used during a phase of one of the major strokes or
choosing a certain exercise because it can transfer to a certain stroke component.
An example would be selecting the lat pull-down exercise (see page 120)
because it targets the latissimus dorsi muscle, which is a prime mover of the
arms in each of the major strokes. Isolation involves choosing an exercise that
emphasizes a certain muscle or muscle group with the goal of strengthening an
area that (1) may be underdeveloped because of muscle imbalances, (2) is
important for injury prevention, or (3) has been identified as an area of weakness
by something in the swimmer's stroke profile.
Another choice concerns which model of dryland training to use—a
traditional weight-training program or a circuit-based program. Traditional
weight-training programs involve performing a certain number of sets and
repetitions of one or two exercises at a time and then moving on to the next set
of exercises. These programs are better reserved for swimmers near college age
and older. In contrast, circuit-training programs involve a series of exercises
performed one after another. After performing one set of an exercise, the person
moves on to the next. Circuit programs are ideal when (1) the dryland program is
being performed on a pool deck, (2) a large group of swimmers is participating
in the program at the same time, or (3) a younger group of swimmers is training.
An additional advantage of circuit programs is that they are time efficient,
allowing a large number of exercises to be completed in a short time.
To maximize your gains when performing a traditional or circuit dryland
program, give careful attention to the order in which you perform the exercises.
All programs should begin with a 10-minute warm-up period consisting of
dynamic flexibility exercises and low-intensity aerobics. Following the warm-
up, you should incorporate several injury prevention and core stabilization
exercises (choose from those in chapter 5). You should begin with total-body
exercises that combine movements of the upper and lower extremities and
progress to multijoint exercises and then isolation exercises. For example, when
training the upper extremity and shoulder girdle, you could begin with a single-
arm lawn mower (page 176), follow with a barbell flat bench press (page 70),
and end with a dumbbell biceps curl (page 28). The underlying concept is to
avoid performing the biceps curl first, which would fatigue the biceps brachii
and decrease the overall weight that you could lift with the single-arm lawn
mower exercise. A swimming analogy would be to avoid performing an
exhaustive kick set before you perform your main quality freestyle set during a
workout, because fatiguing your legs would limit your ability to get the full
benefit from the freestyle set. Following completion of the main exercises, you
can spend time on additional core stabilization exercises and static stretching and
flexibility. Note that your final program should consist of more than three
exercises; the limited number used in this case serve only as an example.
Another concept to consider is that of pushing and pulling exercises. Pushing
exercises such as push-ups and bench presses primarily work the pectoral
muscles and the triceps, whereas pulling exercises such as pull-ups and seated
rows primarily work the lats and biceps. Because these types of exercises mirror
each other in the muscle groups that they target, doing one after the other is often
beneficial in a dryland program because the alternating nature of exercises
allows one group to recover while the other is being exercised.
The next question to address is how many sets and repetitions of each exercise
you should perform. The number of repetitions is dictated by the inverse
relationship between volume and intensity. Exercise volume is equal to the total
number of repetitions performed, and intensity is a measure of the effort being
exerted when performing a given exercise. What this means is that as you
increase the number of repetitions of a given exercise, the overall intensity at
which you will be able to perform that exercise will decrease. For example, you
may be able to perform 15 dumbbell kickbacks with 25 pounds (11 kg), but if
you were to pick up a 40-pound (18 kg) dumbbell, you might be able to perform
only 8 repetitions. This relationship becomes important, depending on your
training goal. If you are trying to improve muscular endurance, you should
choose a weight that allows you to perform 15 to 20 repetitions. If your goal is to
build strength, you should use a weight that allows you to perform only 5 to 8
repetitions. Generally, when performing more repetitions (15 to 20) you should
perform two sets, whereas when you are doing fewer repetitions (5 to 8) you
should perform four or five sets. Your combination of sets and repetitions is
probably appropriate for a given exercise if the targeted muscles feel fatigued
during the last 2 to 3 repetitions of the final set. With circuit-training programs,
the number of repetitions can be either predetermined or time dependent. For
example, at one station you might perform 30 sit-ups (set number of reps) or as
many sit-ups as you can in one minute (time dependent).
Your training goal in regard to endurance versus strength will depend on
where you are in the season. The principle of periodization comes into play here.
Periodization involves breaking the season into various phases, each with a
different training goal. The underlying purpose is to prevent overtraining and
maximize performance.

Dryland Training for Young Swimmers
An important consideration in training is the age of the swimmer. Not too long
ago, strength, or resistance, training was considered inappropriate and potentially
dangerous to the young athlete. Participation in resistance training was thought
to increase the risk of injury to the growth plate, which could have negative
consequences to the child's growth. But the safety and effectiveness of resistance
training in youth is now well documented and supported by position or policy
statements from the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM), American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), American Orthopaedic Society for Sports
Medicine (AOSSM), and the National Strength and Conditioning Association
(NSCA).
Resistance training helps young swimmers develop an enjoyable and positive
outlook by increasing their chance of success through improved performance
and decreasing their risk of injury. With a focus on fundamental fitness ability,
resistance training also prepares them for the demands of in-water practices.
Specific benefits may include improvements in muscular power, muscular
endurance, total body strength, stability around joints, body composition, and
bone mineral density, all of which can improve sport performance.
The research indicates that training-induced strength gains during
preadolescence are possible if the training program is of sufficient duration,
intensity, and volume. Current recommendations are that to produce strength
gains, young athletes should perform two or three sets of 13 to 15 repetitions for
each exercise. Training sessions should take place two to three days per week on
nonconsecutive days. Note that these gains often result from adaptations in
neuromuscular factors such as motor unit activation, recruitment, and
coordination rather than increased muscle size (hypertrophy). Younger athletes
do not have enough muscle-building hormones to cause muscle hypertrophy, but
following puberty, training-induced gains in males and females are associated
with increased muscle mass because of hormonal influences. Resistance training
will not lead to increases in height, but no data indicate that training will stunt
skeletal growth.
Before a young swimmer begins a resistance program, he or she should have
sufficient emotional maturity to accept and follow directions. The athlete should
also be able to understand the benefits and risks associated with a resistance-
training program and specific exercises. When selecting exercises keep in mind
that swimmers in a given age range can vary significantly in strength and
coordination. Exercises should be selected on an individual basis and modified if
necessary. Guidelines are provided throughout the text about exercises that may
not be suitable for young swimmers, and examples are offered about how to
modify exercises to make them more age appropriate.
When designing resistance-training programs for young athletes, a progressive
and stepwise approach in exercise prescription is recommended. This approach
stresses proper form and technique, adequate supervision of all training sessions,
and a slow, stepwise progression of exercises. Kraemer and Fleck (2005)
illustrate the importance of proper exercise selection and considerations for
athletes of various ages (table 1.1).

Table 1.1 Age-Related Resistance-Training Considerations
Ages
7 and younger
8-10
Considerations
Introduce child to basic exercises with little or no weight;
develop the concept of a training session; teach technique;
progress from bodyweight calisthenics, partner exercises, and
light resistance; keep volume low.
Gradually increase the number of exercises; practice technique
on all lifts; start gradual progressive loading; keep exercises
simple; gradually increase volume; carefully monitor toleration
to exercise stress.
11-13
Teach all basic exercise techniques; continue progressive
loading of each exercise; emphasize technique; introduce more
advanced exercises with little or no resistance; increase volume.
14-15
Progress to more advanced youth programs in resistance
exercise; add sport-specific components; emphasize techniques;
increase volume.
16 and older
Move child to entry-level adult programs after all background
knowledge has been mastered and a basic level of training
experience has been gained.
Adapted, by permission, from W.J. Kraemer and S.J. Fleck, 2005, Strength training for young athletes, 2nd ed. (Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics), 13.

CHAPTER 2
ARMS
The arms are extremely important in swimming because they are the link
between the primary force-generating muscles of the upper extremity, the
latissimus dorsi and pectoralis major, and the hands and forearms, which are the
anchor points that propel the swimmer through the water. Chapter 1 compared
the body to a chain that starts at the hands and extends all the way down to the
feet. The main point was that, as a swimmer moves through the water,
movements and forces are transmitted along the chain and that the chain is only
as strong as its weakest link. Of course, the arm muscles also aid in generating
the forces that propel you through the water. Those reasons should help you
understand the importance of targeting the arm muscles with a dryland program.
The elbow divides the arm into an upper and lower component. The elbow is a
hinge joint restricted to two movements, extension and flexion. Elbow extension
occurs when you straighten your arm, moving the forearm away from the upper
arm. Elbow flexion is the opposite, involving bending the forearm toward the
upper arm. The structural framework of the upper arm is the humerus. The lower
arm, typically called the forearm (figure 2.1, a-b), is supported by the radius and
ulna. These three bones are the major attachment sites and levers upon which the
muscles of the arm and forearm originate and act on. The two primary muscle
groups in the arms that are the target of the strengthening exercises in this
chapter are the elbow extensors and elbow flexors. Both contribute to the
maintenance of proper arm position and propulsion during each of the four
competitive strokes.
Figure 2.1 Forearm: (a)front and (b)back.

a
Pronator
teres
Palmaris
longus
Flexor carpi
radialis
Flexor carpi
ulnaris
Anconeus
Brachioradialis
Extensor carpi
radialis longus
Extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Extensor
digitorum