MERIT BADGE SERIES
SWIMMING
+TED GREEN
BOB WEST
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA

HOW TO USE THIS PAMPHLET
The secret to successfully earning a merit badge is for you to use both
the pamphlet and the suggestions of your counselor.
Your counselor can be as important to you as a coach is to an athlete.
Use all of the resources your counselor can make available to you.
This may be the best chance you will have to learn about this particular
subject. Make it count.
If you or your counselor feels that any information in this pamphlet is
incorrect, please let us know. Please state your source of information.
Merit badge pamphlets are reprinted annually and requirements
updated regularly. Your suggestions for improvement are welcome.
Send comments along with a brief statement about yourself to Youth
Development, S209 • Boy Scouts of America • 1325 West Walnut Hill
Lane • P.O. Box 152079 • Irving, TX 75015-2079.

WHO PAYS FOR THIS PAMPHLET?
This merit badge pamphlet is one in a series of more than 100 covering
all kinds of hobby and career subjects. It is made available for you
to buy as a service of the national and local councils, Boy Scouts of
America. The costs of the development, writing, and editing of the
merit badge pamphlets are paid for by the Boy Scouts of America in
order to bring you the best book at a reasonable price.
730

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
SWIMMING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA

Note to the Counselor
Like other merit badges, the Swimming merit badge has been
developed to teach and train youth in a manner consistent with
the overall goals and values of the Boy Scouts of America. The
merit badge counselor should be fair and consistent and should
present and teach the skills as presented in this pamphlet. None
of the requirements should be omitted, and nothing should be
added to them.
Candidates with an extensive swimming background may
be able to meet all or most of the requirements with little or no
formal instruction from the counselor. Most Scouts, however,
will need instruction prior to completing the requirements.
Scouts may train as a single buddy pair or in small groups.
Training sessions can be on a flexible schedule. Alternatively,
larger groups may train together on a more formal basis at
prearranged times. A counselor may also provide individual
instruction as long as there is another adult or youth present.
Subject to equipment availability and other constraints, each
candidate should have the opportunity to choose which of the
optional requirements he will complete. The “Aquatics” section
of Camp Program and Property Management provides a sug-
gested outline for Swimming merit badge instruction.
The merit badge instruction should begin with a review of
requirement 3. This will lay a suitable foundation for safety and
first aid requirements 1 and 2. This review also will indicate indi-
vidual levels of skill proficiency in various strokes, floating, and
feetfirst entry. Scouts should learn the leaping entry in the first
session. The leaping entry, the preferred entry for the swim tests
used in the Second and First Class rank requirements, should
be taught and emphasized in the first session as a safety skill to
be used throughout the class. The faceup float (requirement 6a)
35957
ISBN 978-0-8395-3352-8
©2008 Boy Scouts of America
2010 Printing
BANG/Brainerd, MN
1-2010/059413

also should be taught in the First Class session as a confidence
builder and as a resting and survival procedure for use during
the class and beyond.
Stroke instruction should begin in the first session and
continue throughout the course. Base individualized instruction
on the proficiency of each participant. Each participant may
be given the opportunity to complete the stroke requirement
(requirement 5) when he appears ready.
Regarding other requirements, Scouts should first master sur-
face dives (requirement 7) before beginning snorkeling and scuba
diving (requirement 8a). They should receive diving instruction
(requirement 9) prior to competitive skills instruction (require-
ment 8b). Survival skills and knowledge (requirements 4, 6b, 6c,
and 6d) can be covered at any time, because they relate closely to
the safety and preliminary skills in requirements 1 and 3.
If Scouts complete requirement 10 concurrently with in-water
skills instruction, then the pertinent information should be
presented early enough in the course to allow time for Scouts
to study and prepare individual exercise program plans.
Requirement 10c must be completed in writing. Requirements
10a, 10b, and 10d may be done orally, but Scouts should not
simply listen to a presentation from the counselor. Each merit
badge candidate must learn the material and demonstrate that
knowledge by explaining the facts or concepts to his counselor.
SWIMMER
QUARD
SWIMMING
3

4
SWIMMING
Requirements
1. Discuss the prevention of and treatment for health concerns
that could occur while swimming, including hypothermia,
dehydration, sunburn, heat exhaustion, heatstroke, muscle
cramps, hyperventilation, spinal injury, stings and bites, and
cuts and scrapes.
2. Do the following:
a. Identify the conditions that must exist before performing
CPR on a person. Explain how to recognize
such conditions.
b. Demonstrate proper technique for performing CPR using
a training device approved by your counselor.
3. Before doing the following requirements, successfully
complete Second Class rank requirements 7a-7c and
First Class rank requirements 9a–9c.
Second Class rank requirements:
(7a) Tell what precautions must be taken for a safe swim.
(7b) Demonstrate your ability to jump feetfirst into
water over your head in depth, level off and swim
25 feet on the surface, stop, turn sharply, resume
swimming, then return to your starting place.
(7c) Demonstrate water rescue methods by reaching
with your arm or leg, by reaching with a suitable
object, and by throwing lines and objects. Explain
why swimming rescues should not be attempted
when a reaching or throwing rescue is possible, and
explain why and how a rescue swimmer should
avoid contact with the victim.

First Class rank requirements:
(9a) Tell what precautions must be taken for a
safe trip afloat.
(9b) Before doing the following requirement,
successfully complete the BSA swimmer test:
Jump feetfirst into water over your head in depth,
swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or more
of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke,
trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy,
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be swum
continuously and include at least one sharp turn.
After completing the swim, rest by floating.
(9c) With a helper and a practice victim, show
a line rescue both as tender and as rescuer.
The practice victim should be approximately
30 feet from shore in deep water.
4. Demonstrate survival skills by jumping feetfirst into deep
water wearing clothes (shoes, socks, swim trunks, long
pants, belt, and long-sleeved shirt). Remove shoes and
socks, inflate the shirt, and show that you can float using
the shirt for support. Remove and inflate the pants. Swim
50 feet using the inflated pants for support, then show how
to reinflate the pants while still afloat.
5. Swim continuously for 150 yards using the following
strokes in good form and in a strong manner:
front crawl or trudgen for 25 yards, back
crawl for 25 yards, sidestroke for 25 yards,
breaststroke for 25 yards, and elementary
backstroke for 50 yards.
6. Do the following:
a. Float faceup in a resting position for at
least one minute.
b. Demonstrate survival floating for at least
five minutes.
c. While wearing a properly fitted personal
flotation device (PFD), demonstrate the HELP
and huddle positions. Explain their purposes.
d. Explain why swimming or survival floating
will hasten the onset of hypothermia in cold water.
SWIMMING
5

7. In water over your head, but not to exceed 10 feet, do each of
the following:
a. Use the feetfirst method of surface diving and bring an
object up from the bottom.
b. Do a headfirst surface dive (pike or tuck), and bring
the object up again.
c. Do a headfirst surface dive to a depth of at least 5 feet
and swim underwater for three strokes. Come to the
surface, take a breath, and repeat the sequence twice.
8. Do ONE of the following:
a. Demonstrate snorkeling and scuba diving knowledge:
OR
(1) Demonstrate selection and fit of mask, snor-
kel, and fins; discuss safety in both pool and
open-water snorkeling.
(2) Demonstrate proper use of mask, snorkel,
and fins for underwater search and rescue.
(3) Describe the sport of scuba diving or snorkel-
ing, and demonstrate your knowledge of BSA
policies and procedures relating to that sport.
b. Demonstrate the following competitive swimming skills:
(1) Racing dive from a pool edge or dock edge
(no elevated dives from racing platforms or
starting blocks)
(2) Racing form for 25 yards on one competitive stroke
(front crawl, back crawl, breaststroke, or butterfly)
(3) Racing turns for the stroke that you chose in 8b(2),
OR, if the camp facilities cannot accommodate the
racing turn, repeat 8b(2) with an additional stroke.
(4) Describe the sport of competitive swimming.

9. Following the guidelines set in the BSA Safe Swim Defense,
in water at least 7 feet deep, show a standing headfirst dive
from a dock or pool deck. Show a long shallow dive, also
from the dock or pool deck.
10. Do the following:
a. Explain the health benefits of regular aerobic exercise,
and explain why many people today do not get enough
of the beneficial kinds of exercise.
b. Discuss why swimming is favored as both a fitness and
a therapeutic exercise.
c. Write a plan for a swimming exercise program that will
promote aerobic/vascular fitness, strength and muscle
tone, body flexibility, and weight control for a person
of Scout age. Identify resources and facilities available
in your home community that would be needed for
such a program.
d. Discuss with your counselor the incentives and obstacles
for staying with the fitness program you identified in
requirement 10c. Explain the unique benefits that could
be gained from this program, and discuss how personal
health awareness and self-discipline would relate to your
own willingness and ability to pursue such a program.
SWIMMING 7

55
60 5
15
20.

Contents
Safety.......................................................................................11
Swimming Skills....................................................................29
Swimming Strokes..............................................................35
Surface Dives.....................................................................49
Snorkeling and Scuba........................................................53
Diving................................................................................69
Competitive Swimming.......................................................75
Swimming for Fitness and Health.........................................91
Swimming Resources..........................................................95
SWIMMING 9

Safety
Developed more than 60 years ago, the procedures included in
the Boy Scouts of America's water safety plan have earned
Scouting what is believed to be the most commendable water
safety record of any youth organization in the United States.
BSA Safe Swim Defense
All swimming activity in Scouting is conducted according to
Safe Swim Defense standards. The eight points of Safe Swim
Defense are as follows.
1. Qualified Supervision
All swimming activity must be supervised by a
mature and conscientious adult age 21 or
older who understands and knowingly
accepts responsibility for the well-being
and safety of those in his or her care,
and who is trained in and committed
to compliance with the eight points
of BSA Safe Swim Defense. It is
strongly recommended that all units
have at least one adult or older
youth member currently trained in
BSA Swimming and Water Rescue
or BSA Lifeguard to assist in the
planning and conduct of all
swimming activities.
SAFETY
GUAP
SWIMMING 11

Safe areas are
best inspected as
a team so hazards
can be identified
and removed
if possible.
2. Personal Health Review
A complete health history is required of all partici-
pants as evidence of fitness for swimming activities.
Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or
legal guardian. Participants should be asked to relate
any recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the
activity. Supervision and protection should be adjusted to
anticipate any potential risks associated with individual
health conditions. For significant health conditions, the
adult supervisor should require an examination by a phy-
sician and consult with the parent, guardian, or caregiver
for appropriate precautions.
3. Safe Area
All swimming areas must be carefully inspected and pre-
pared for safety prior to each activity. Water depth, quality,
temperature, movement, and clarity are important consider-
ations. Hazards must be eliminated or isolated by conspicu-
ous markings and discussed with participants.
Controlled access. There must be safe areas for all participating
ability groups to enter and leave the water. Swimming areas of
appropriate depth must be defined for each ability group. The
entire area must be within easy reach of designated rescue
personnel. The area must be clear of boat traffic, surfing,
or other nonswimming activities.
Bottom conditions and depth: The bottom must be clear of
trees and debris. Abrupt changes in depth are not allowed in
the nonswimmer area. Isolated underwater hazards should be
marked with floats. Rescue personnel must be able to easily
reach the bottom. Maximum recommended water depth in clear
water is 12 feet. Maximum water depth in turbid water is 8 feet.
12 SWIMMING

Visibility. Underwater swimming and diving are prohibited in
turbid water. Turbid water exists when a swimmer treading
water cannot see his feet. Swimming at night is allowed only
in areas with both surface and underwater lighting.
Diving and elevated entry. Diving is permitted only into clear,
unobstructed water from heights no greater than 40 inches.
Water depth must be at least 7 feet for dives from fixed heights
up to 18 inches and at least 10 feet for dives from the side or a
diving board for heights from 18 inches to 40 inches. Persons
should not jump into water from heights greater than they are
tall, and only into water depths where impact with the bottom
is absent or slight. No elevated entry is permitted where the
person must clear any obstacle, including land.
Water temperature. Comfortable water temperature for swim-
ming is near 80 degrees. Activity in water at 70 degrees or less
should be of limited duration and closely monitored for
negative effects of chilling.
Water quality. Bodies of stagnant, fetid water, areas with signif-
icant algae or foam, or areas polluted by livestock or waterfowl
should be avoided. Comply with any signs posted by local health
authorities. Swimming is not allowed in pools with green, murky,
or cloudy water.
Moving water. Participants should be able to easily regain and
maintain their footing in currents or waves. Areas with large
waves, swiftly flowing currents, or moderate currents that flow
toward the open sea or into areas of danger should be avoided.
Weather. Participants should be moved from the water to a
position of safety whenever lightning or thunder threatens.
Wait at least 30 minutes after the last lightning flash or thunder
before leaving shelter. Take precautions to prevent sunburn,
dehydration, and hypothermia.
PFD use. Swimming in clear water over 12 feet deep, in turbid
water over 8 feet deep, or in flowing water may be allowed if all
participants wear properly fitted personal flotation devices and
the supervisor determines that swimming with PFDs is safe
under the circumstances.
SAFETY
SWIMMING
13

14
SWIMMING
4. Response Personnel (Lifeguards)
Every swimming activity must be closely and continuously
monitored by a trained rescue team on the alert for and
ready to respond during emergencies. Professionally trained
lifeguards satisfy this need when provided by a regulated facility
or tour operator. When lifeguards are not provided by others, the
adult supervisor must assign at least two rescue personnel, with
additional numbers to maintain a ratio to
participants of 1:10. The supervisor must
provide instruction and rescue equipment
and assign areas of responsibility as
outlined in the BSA publication Aquatics
Supervision. The qualified supervisor, the
designated response personnel, and the
lookout work together as a safety team.
A simple emergency action plan should
be formulated by the safety team and
shared with participants as appropriate.
5. Lookout
The lookout continuously monitors the conduct of the
swim, identifies any departures from Safe Swim Defense
guidelines, alerts response personnel as needed, and
monitors the weather and environment. The look-
out should have a clear view of the entire area
but be close enough for easy verbal
communication. The lookout must
have a sound understanding of
Safe Swim Defense but is not
required to perform rescues.
The adult supervisor may
serve simultaneously as the
lookout but must assign the
task to someone else if
engaged in activities that
preclude focused observation.

6. Ability Groups
All youth and adult participants are designated as swim-
mers, beginners, or nonswimmers based on swimming
ability confirmed by standardized BSA swim classification
tests. Each group is assigned a specific swimming area with
depths consistent with those abilities. The classification tests
should be renewed annually, preferably at the beginning of
the season.
Swimmers pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner
using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breast-
stroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy,
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one
swim without stops and must include at least one sharp turn.
After completing the swim, rest by floating.
Beginners pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth, level off, and swim 25 feet on the surface. Stop,
turn sharply, resume swimming, and return to the starting place.
Anyone who has not completed either the beginner or swimmer
tests is classified as a nonswimmer.
The nonswimmer area should be no more than waist to
chest deep and should be enclosed by physical boundaries such
as the shore, a pier, or lines. The enclosed beginner area should
contain water of standing depth and may extend to depths just
over the head. The swimmer area may be up to 12 feet in depth
in clear water and should be defined by floats or other markers.
SAFETY
SWIMMING 15

7. Buddy System
Every participant is paired with
another participant. Buddies stay
together, monitor each other, and
alert the safety team if either needs
assistance or is missing.
Buddies check into and out of
the area together. Buddies are nor-
mally in the same ability group and
remain in their assigned area. If they
are not of the same ability group, then
they swim in the area assigned to the
buddy with the lesser ability.
Buddy checks indicate how closely the buddies are keeping
track of each other. Roughly every 10 minutes, or as needed to
keep the buddies together, the lookout, or other person desig-
nated by the supervisor, gives an audible signal, such as a single
whistle blast, and a call for “Buddies.” Buddies are expected
to raise each other's hand before completion of a slow, audible
count to 10. Buddies who take longer to find each other should
be reminded of their responsibility for each other's safety.
A buddy check also helps the safety team monitor everyone
in the water. If a buddy is missing, a search is begun immediately
in accordance with a prearranged emergency action plan. If every-
one has a buddy, a count is made by area and compared with
the total number known to be in the water. Once the count is
confirmed, a signal is given to resume swimming.
8. Discipline
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants
should know, understand, and respect the rules and proce-
dures for safe swimming provided by Safe Swim Defense
guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed prior to
the outing and reviewed for all participants at the water's
edge just before the swimming activity begins. People are
more likely to follow directions when they know the reasons
for rules and procedures. Consistent, impartially applied rules
supported by skill and good judgment provide stepping-stones
to a safe, enjoyable outing.
16
SWIMMING

SAFETY
Pool and Surf Swimming
Safe Swim Defense applies to swimming at a beach,
private or public pool, wilderness pond, stream,
lake, or anywhere Scouts swim. Here are some
additional points for the pool and the surf.
Pool. If the swimming activity is in a public
facility where others are using the pool at
the same time and the pool operator pro-
vides guard personnel, there may be no
need for additional Scout lifeguards and
lookouts. However, there must always be
an adult supervisor who understands his or
her responsibility and ensures that the ele-
ments of Safe Swim Defense are followed. The
buddy system is also critically important, even
in a public pool. Even in a crowd, you are alone
without protection if no one is paying attention to
your circumstances.
The rule that people swim only in water depths suited
to their ability also applies at pools. Most public pools divide
shallow and deep water. This may be enough for defining
appropriate swimming areas. If not, the supervisor should
clearly point out to participants the appropriate areas of the
public facility.
Surf. The surf environment—with its wave action, currents,
tides, backwash, and sea life such as stinging jellyfish-requires
precautions for safe swimming that aren't necessary in other
environments. A swimmer's physical condition and skill are
very important and should enable the swimmer to recover
footing in waves, swim for long periods without getting
worn out, and remain calm and in control when faced with
unexpected conditions.
Designated swimming areas are marked by flags or pennants
that are easy to see. Beginners and nonswimmers should be
positioned inshore from standing lifeguards who are equipped
with rescue equipment. Better swimmers are permitted seaward
of the lifeguards but must remain shoreward of anchored marker
buoys. The lifeguard-to-swimmer ratio should always be 1-to-10
with a rescue team supplied with a rescue tube or other flota-
tion aid stationed at the beach area.
Unless your unit
is experienced
in ocean
swimming, it
is probably best
to swim at a
beach with
professional
lifeguards.
SWIMMING
17

SAFETY
Rip Currents
The United States Lifesaving Association estimates that most rescues-
about 80 percent—at surf beaches involve swimmers caught in rip currents.
More than 100 swimmers die each year from this swimming hazard. Rip
currents are long, narrow sections of water that form after waves break and
the water goes back out. Rip currents form a funnel of current that moves
much faster than the current on either side. The current can be so strong
that it may be difficult or impossible to swim against it. It can carry an
unsuspecting swimmer long distances from shore and even out to sea.
Rip currents occur in oceans and any place where there are waves,
including bodies of water such as the Great Lakes. To avoid getting caught
in a rip current, do not swim near piers or jetties (walls built out into the
water to protect a harbor or beach). Rip currents are often hard to see, but
look for the following clues:
•
An area having a noticeable difference in water color
•
A channel of churning, choppy water
•
•
A line of foam, seaweed, or debris moving steadily away from shore
A break in the incoming wave pattern
If you are caught in a rip current, don't fight it by swimming toward
the beach. Instead,
turn and escape by
swimming parallel
to the shore. If that
doesn't work, float or
tread water. Call or
wave for help.
18
SWIMMING
WAVES
BEACH

SAFETY
First Aid
Following Safe Swim Defense will eliminate any serious risks in
swimming, but remember to take proper precautions.
Hypothermia occurs when the body's core temperature
falls below the normal range and the body cannot produce
enough heat. Early signs include bluish lips and shivering.
Further cooling will upset the victim's ability to think clearly
and to do simple tasks. The person may appear groggy and
lack coordination. As cooling continues, the pulse rate slows
and blood is directed to the critical organs and away from the
extremities as the body attempts to prevent further heat loss.
The heart and lungs keep working at the expense of the hands,
feet, and brain. Further cooling will lead to unconsciousness
and even death.
The first treatment for hypothermia is to prevent further
heat loss. Once out of the water, the victim should not be allowed
to walk. Move him to warmth and shelter such as a building,
tent, or vehicle. As soon as possible, remove wet clothing and
put on dry clothes or wrap the person in a blanket or dry tow-
els. If the victim is unconscious, open the airway and check for
breathing. You may apply warm (but not hot) towels or items
such as hot water bottles wrapped in a towel to only the trunk,
crotch, neck, and head. Do not rub his legs or apply warming
devices to the arms or legs. These actions may cause more blood
to flow to the surface of the skin and away from vital organs.
Finally, since even mild cases of hypothermia place the body
in a highly stressed condition, closely watch all hypothermia
victims for several hours even if they appear to have recovered.
Heat reactions, including heat exhaustion and heatstroke,
result when the body can't keep itself cool enough. Symptoms
of heat exhaustion may include dizziness, faintness, nausea, and
a severe lack of energy. A person also may develop a headache,
muscle cramps, and rapid pulse; look pale; and be sweating
heavily. To treat heat exhaustion, have the victim lie down in a
Prevent heat
reactions by
drinking plenty
of fluids and
limiting time
out in the open
on hot days.
Most sunburns are first-degree burns, but repeated sunburn over a long
period of time can cause skin damage and increase the risk of skin cancer.
It's best to prevent sunburn by using plenty of sunscreen with a sun protec-
tion factor (SPF) rating of at least 15, or by wearing a hat and covering up.
But if you have to treat a painful sunburn, use a cool, wet cloth and change
it frequently. Find shade.
SWIMMING 19

If you have a
cramp while
swimming in deep
water and cannot
swim to safety,
float on your back
or survival float
and wait for help.
cool, shady spot with the feet raised. Loosen clothing and cool
him with a damp cloth or a fan. Have him sip water. Recovery
should be rapid. If the condition worsens, get medical help.
Heatstroke is the extreme, life-threatening stage of a heat
reaction in which dehydration (water loss) has caused a very
high body temperature. The victim's cooling system has started
to fail, and the person's core temperature is at a dangerously
high level. In addition to any symptoms of heat exhaustion,
heatstroke symptoms can include hot, sweaty, red skin, confu-
sion, and disorientation; the victim may be unconscious. The
victim must be cooled immediately. Loosen tight clothing, fan
him, and apply wet towels. If you have ice packs, wrap them in
a thin barrier (such as a T-shirt) and place them under the arm-
pits and against the neck and groin area. If the person is able
to drink, give small amounts of cool water. Treat for shock and
seek emergency medical help.
Muscle cramps, sometimes called muscle spasms, occur
when muscles are not getting enough oxygen or nutrients or
when the blood flow cannot prevent the build-up of wastes
in muscles. Vigorous exercise and sweating can cause muscle
cramps in the limbs. Cold water or cold weather increases the
likelihood of cramping. Sudden, vigorous exercise without proper
warm-up also can increase the risk of muscle cramps. If a muscle
begins to cramp while you are swimming, get out of the water
and massage the cramp. If conditions are hot, cool down and
drink fluids. If conditions are cold, find warmth and cover. Rub
the cramping muscles to improve circulation.
Sunburn is a familiar condition that can occur during swim-
ming activities. Reflected sunlight from the water can be as
damaging as direct exposure. To prevent sunburn, cover up, use
a waterproof sunscreen, and limit your time in the sun. If your
skin begins to redden or feel painful, get out of the sun. To treat
sunburn, apply clean, wet compresses (cloths, towels, or gauze
pads) dipped in cool water. Protect the burned area from further
sun exposure.
Stings and bites are not a common hazard when swim-
ming in pools or lakes, but in saltwater swimmers may suffer
severe stings from certain types of jellyfish or other saltwater
creatures. Knowing the body of water you are swimming in and
avoiding possible contact with dangerous sea animals is the best
strategy. For jellyfish stings, soak the area with vinegar or alcohol,
or cover with a paste of baking soda mixed with water. Get medi-
cal help if the pain is severe; if the pain does not let up in a short
Speaking of stings
and bites, if you
will be swimming
in the ocean,
beware of sharks.
(Although bull
sharks have been
known to inhabit
the waterways of
the Mississippi!)
The possibility of a
shark bite is pretty
remote, but play
it safe by finding
out what you can
about the area
where you will be
swimming before
you decide to
dive in.
20
SWIMMING

time; or if the victim has an allergic reaction, feels dizzy, or has
trouble breathing. For typical insect stings and bites, apply basic
first aid as described in the Boy Scout Handbook or the First Aid
merit badge pamphlet.
Cuts and scrapes may occur on the feet when swimming
in natural waters if the bottom has not been carefully checked
for hazards. In pool swimming, such injuries are more likely
when climbing in and out of the water without being careful
along rough edges or corners. As in other situations, the wound
should be cleaned, disinfected, and covered. The patrol first-aid
kit should contain appropriate supplies for minor wound
treatment. For severe bleeding injuries, control bleeding with
direct pressure or at pressure points until emergency medical
help arrives.
Spinal injuries can occur from diving into shallow or
obstructed water. Rescuers must be very careful when a spinal
injury is suspected. Spinal injuries can be fatal or can cause
paralysis. If the victim is not handled properly, additional seri-
ous injury could result. Moving a victim is an extremely delicate
task best left to trained emergency personnel, but if no one else
is present you may need to act. In a swimming accident, you
may have to move the victim to prevent drowning or to perform
rescue breathing.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is the important
first response in a cardiac emergency. CPR is used in
near-drownings when a victim's breathing and heart-
beat have stopped. Include individuals trained in CPR
at every swimming outing. Complete CPR should be
attempted only by persons trained and qualified under
the supervision of a trained instructor. The Boy Scout
Handbook and the First Aid merit badge pamphlet fur-
ther explain CPR and when it should be used.
Some important techniques are not covered by
requirement 2 of the Swimming merit badge. To receive
full and proper CPR training, contact your American Red
Cross chapter or the American Heart Association. See
the resources section at the end of this pamphlet. Your
counselor can help you.
SWIMMING
21

SAFETY
When tending to a suspected spinal injury victim, move
the victim's head, neck, and back as little as possible. The
technique used to limit this movement is called in-line stabi-
lization. For information on this technique, see the chapter
concerning spinal injury management in the Lifesaving merit
badge pamphlet.
Hyperventilation is the result of overbreathing, either
deliberately or as a result of panic. Hyperventilating decreases
the level of carbon dioxide in the blood and suppresses the
breathing reflex. The likely result is dizziness and fainting.
Hyperventilation from panic is not likely to occur in swimming
if all participants stay in water suited to their individual skill
levels and the activity is properly supervised and disciplined.
If a swimmer becomes panicky, he or she should be removed
from the water and calmed. Before resuming any water activity,
determine and resolve the cause of the panic. A foolish swim-
mer may deliberately hyperventilate to suppress the breathing
reflex for underwater swimming. This is dangerous and puts the
swimmer at high risk. Such conduct is prohibited and should be
sharply disciplined.
Survival Skills
Cold Water
When a person is in cold water, the skin and nearby tissues cool
quickly. The body immediately begins producing heat to rewarm
the skin and to prevent the cooling of vital organs. Hypothermia
occurs when the body loses heat faster than it can produce it,
which causes the internal body temperature to decrease.
Water or air temperature lower than 70 degrees poses hypo-
thermia risks. If goose bumps appear on wet skin shortly after
leaving the water, then the air temperature should be considered
cold and swimmers should take proper precautions. The first
protection for cold-water activity is to reduce the length of time
in or on the water. At 70 degrees, maximum safe in-the-water
time is approximately 20 minutes. Open-water swimming in
temperatures of 65 degrees or lower may pose substantial risks
and should be avoided. In all swimming activities, precautions
should include procedures and equipment for immediate warm-
ing of anyone showing symptoms of chill.
Moving water and
wind substantially
increase the loss
of body heat.
Swimming and
treading water
also cool the
body faster than
remaining still.
22
SWIMMING

Activities Afloat
For all activity afloat on cold water or in cold weather,
wear appropriate clothing to keep you warm. You
should wear a personal flotation device (PFD) at all
times, normally on top of the outermost garment. Have
a dry change of clothes available in case of a spill. As in
swimming, preparation and plans for any activity afloat
should include procedures and equipment for warming
anyone showing symptoms of chill. Overboard activ-
ity is not recommended in water temperatures of 65
degrees or lower, except for closely supervised capsize
skills training in preparation for activity afloat.
A properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard-approved PFD should be
worn for all activities afloat in small craft. The PFD will help keep
you afloat. In addition, it can provide insulation and significantly
reduce heat loss in cold water that could lead to hypothermia.
If you are alone in cold water and more than a short
distance from safety, your best strategy is to float motionless.
This will help you conserve heat. Keep your PFD and all
clothing on for insulation. Heat loss is most rapid from the head
and crotch.
Because water will move heat away
from the body faster than air, keeping
your face and head in the water will
speed up heat loss. Vigorous swimming
will chill you most rapidly. Treading
water is tiring and will produce heat
loss almost as rapidly as swimming.
Survival floating, or drown-proofing
(described later in this chapter), might
be somewhat better than swimming or
treading water if your movements are
slow and limited, but submerging the
head and face will increase heat loss.
For treading water, you can use the
rotary kick, but do so sparingly. Your
body will tire quickly and lose heat
rapidly when treading water.
SAFETY
SWIMMING
23

HELP (heat escape lessening posture)
Huddle together with sides touching.
For these reasons, your best cold-water survival strategy
is to float motionless with your PFD and clothes on, your head
out of the water, and your legs drawn up close to your chest.
This is called the heat escape lessening posture (HELP). If you
are stranded in cold water with one or more persons, you should
huddle together to reduce the cold-water contact and conserve
heat. To do this, press together tightly and float motionless.
Surviving in Cold Water
• Wear a PFD.
2