SWIMMING
FOR TOTAL
FITNESS
A Progressive Aerobic Program
Jane Katz, Ed.D.

A
PROGRESSIVE
AEROBIC
PROGRAM
S
WIMMING
for
TOTAL
FITNESS
UPDATED
BY JANE KATZ, Ed.D.
WITH
NANCY P. BRUNING
ILLUSTRATIONS BY PHILLIP JONES
BROADWAY BOOKS
NEW YORK

The advice and exercises in this book are intended to be used only in conjunction with the advice
of your own personal physician. Because of the differences in physical conditioning from
individual to individual, your doctor should make sure that these exercises are safe for you.
Consult your physician before performing this or any other exercise program.
B
BROADWAY
Previous editions of this book were published in 1981 and 1993 by Doubleday. This edition
reprinted by special arrangement with Doubleday.
Swimming for Total Fitness. Copyright © 1981, 1993 by Jane Katz and Nancy P. Bruning. All
rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher. For information,
address: Broadway Books, a division of Random House, Inc., 1540 Broadway, New York, NY
10036.
BROADWAY BOOKS and its logo, a letter B bisected on the diagonal, are trademarks of Broadway
Books, a division of Random House, Inc.
Visit our website at www.broadwaybooks.com
The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has cataloged the previous edition as:
Katz, Jane.
Swimming for total fitness : a progressive aerobic program / by
Jane Katz with Nancy P. Bruning; illustrations by Phillip Jones.—
Updated.
p. cm.
"Main Street Books."
1. Swimming. 2. Physical fitness. I. Bruning, Nancy P.
II. Title.
GV837.K355 1992
797.2'1-dc20
92-31877
eISBN: 978-0-30778611-1
v3.1
THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
TO ALL SWIMMERS
PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE.
MAY YOUR JOIE DE L'EAU
ALWAYS BE PART
OF YOUR JOIE DE VIVRE!
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Since I've been swimming all my life, acknowledging everyone who has
contributed in some way to the information found between the covers
of this book seems a more formidable task than writing the book itself!
But here goes. I'd like to thank:
• My parents, Leon and Dorothea, who introduced me to the
wonders of the water at a very early age.
• My sisters, Elaine and June, who have always been supportive
of my swimming endeavors, and have shared their expertise as
well.
• Particularly my brother Paul-former All-American and
international swimming champion at Yale University, who, in
his coaching career, has brought the La Salle College swimming
team to its first conference championship since 1966-for
sharing his theories and techniques with me.
• My nephews, Stephen, Jason, Justin, and Austen, who
continually share their fun in water.
• Nancy P. Bruning, whose writing expertise and love of
swimming have helped in large part to make this book possible;
Lindy Hess; Gerry Helferich, my initial editor (a.k.a. “that
swimming maniac”); to Phillip Jones, whose illustrations help
prove that one picture is worth a thousand swimming lessons.
• Michele Martin, Theresa Horner, and Katharine Chang for
initiating and carrying out this updated state-of-the-art version
of our book, to Kacy Tebbel for copy editing, Marysarah Quinn
and Patrice Fodero for book design, Peter Kruzan for cover
design, and to Liz Kurnetz.
• Lisa Harbatkin and Stuart Kampel, for their assistance in the
initial stages of the book.
...
• Linda Ayache for her help in typing the manuscript.
• All the doctors and consultants who were generous enough to
contribute their time and expertise in answering our questions.
• To Dr. Willibald Nagler, for his timely comments in the
Foreword.
• To Gil Rogin and John Butterfield for their quotable quotes.
and finally all my swimming and dry-land buddies who have given
me their support and feedback over the years: the various staff members
and officials of the U.S. Masters Swimming Committee, Inc., including
June Krauser, Ted Haartz, Enid Uhrich, John Spannuth, Suzanne Rague,
and Dorothy Donnelly; the past and current presidents of the
International Swimming Hall of Fame—Buck Dawson, the late John B.
Kelly, Jr., and Dr. Sam Freas; the members of the CCNY (my alma
mater!) swim team and its staff, Jim Sinocchi, Greg Kincheloe, and
particularly Elaine Fincham and coach Marcello Rodriguez; the
swimmers of the Empire Swim Club and its inaugural president, Jim
Forbes; fitness and competitive swimmers around the world; also Phil
Moriarity, former coach at Yale University; Dr. Herbert L. Erlanger; Pat
Earle; Dr. Michael Ross; Bob Fine; Louise Dembeck-Neiman; Dr. Paul
Hutinger; Margaret A. Johnson; Fran Hare; Patti Robison; Roz Heitner;
Elizabeth Nichol; Leslie Porte; and finally all my students and
professional colleagues with whom I've had the pleasure to teach and
work.
CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Foreword
by Willibald Nagler, M.D., F.A.C.P.
Introduction
Part One: The Fundamentals of Swimming
Lesson One
Breathing, flutter kicking, bobbing
Lesson Two
Controlled breathing, prone float and recovery to a stand, prone glide and
flutter kicking with assistance
Lesson Three
Crawl-stroke arm motion, prone glide with flutter kicking (unassisted)
Lesson Four
Crawl stroke with rhythmic breathing
Lesson Five
Buoyancy check, deep-water tour, treading
Lesson Six
Supine float with flutter kicking and recovery to a stand, deep-water
treading
Lesson Seven
Supine sculling with flutter kicking, shallow surface entry
Lesson Eight
Elementary backstroke with flutter kick, sitting dive entry
Lesson Nine
Supine float with whip kick, elementary backstroke with whip kick
Lesson Ten
Windmill backstroke
Part Two: The Techniques of Swimming
Stroke Components
Freestyle
Backstroke
Breaststroke
Butterfly Stroke
Sidestroke
Part Three: Starts, Dives, and Turns
Starts
Crawl or freestyle in-the-water start, breaststroke in-the-water start,
butterfly in-the-water start, sidestroke in-the-water start, backstroke start
Dives
Kneeling, semi-standing, standing, wind-up, grab-start dives
Turns
Crawl-stroke/freestyle open turn, crawl-stroke/freestyle closed turn,
backstroke open turn, breaststroke open turn, butterfly open turn,
sidestroke open turn, freestyle flip turn, backstroke spin turn, backstroke
flip turn, transitional turns
Part Four: Swimming-for-Fitness Progressive Workout Program
Phase I: Beginners' Workouts
Phase II: Intermediate Workouts
Phase III: Advanced Workouts
Phase IV: Super Workouts
Swimming to Win
Early season, mid-season, and taper and peak workouts
Part Five: Equipment
Pools
Swim Suits
Goggles
Bathing Caps
Kickboards
Swim Fins
Pull-Buoys
Hand Paddles
Other Resistance Devices
Clocks and Other Timing Devices
Supplier/Manufacturers
Swimming Magazines
Organizations
Part Six: Dr. J's Q's & A's
Chlorine, Skin, and Hair
Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat
Aches and Pains
Especially for Women
Nutrition, Diet, Weight Loss
Swimming Faster and Farther
Odds and Ends
Just for Fun
Appendixes
Appendix A: Swimmers' Shape-ups
Appendix B: Safe Swimming
Appendix C: For the Record
Appendix D: For Your Record
FOREWORD
Throughout history, water has been used to promote and restore
health. In aqua sana est (Water is healthy) was chiseled by the Romans
into the walls of their baths. And, whatever reasons the Romans had for
crediting water as a source of well-being, we now know that its physical
properties have a health-promoting effect. This promotion of health
through swimming has been the spark behind the work of Dr. Jane Katz.
In her book she sets forth a fitness program using modern training
methods developed from her experience as both a teacher and a
competitive swimmer. This book, which is addressed to the fledgling
swimmer as much as to the experienced one, shows swimming to be a
satisfying and healthy way to physical fitness.
Swimming has many advantages over other sports. Most aerobic
activities (that is, those that make us out of breath), such as jogging,
tennis, climbing, and aerobic dancing, place stress on the weight-bearing
joints and the lumbar spine. Swimming, on the other hand, gives an
aerobic effect with less stress to the joints. In addition, moving the arms
and legs against the resistance of the water is the equivalent of
exercising with weights, but since water doesn't allow any sudden,
harmful movements, the risk of injury is lowered. Also, swimming
exercises both sides of the body equally. Out of the water, only cross-
country skiing even approaches this symmetrical effect.
Although swimming is ideal for people of any age, it is particularly
beneficial for the older person. By the age of sixty or seventy, many
people who are in otherwise excellent health are hampered in sports by
minor hypertrophic arthritic changes in the spine and the weight-bearing
joints, which can make it rather difficult to jog, play tennis, or take part
in other sporting activities. For these people, swimming is an excellent
way to reap the aerobic benefits of running or tennis without incurring
any pain. In the water, the weight-bearing stress of the vertical position
is eliminated, there is less stress on the joints during the contraction of
the muscles, and what stress there is is distributed equally throughout
the joints. For these reasons swimming is a very useful therapeutic
activity for many locomotion problems. In fact, the swimmer can do
much by himself to contribute to his own rehabilitation, thereby often
shortening an otherwise long and expensive process.
In addition, recent reports show that often youngsters who are not
able to participate in sports like track or soccer because of some
respiratory illness such as asthma can become successful competitive
swimmers. The air near the surface of the water is freer of dust and
other pollutants, and it has been shown that exhaling against the
resistance of the water can dilate the bronchi. Furthermore, everyone,
not only asthmatics, can benefit from the efficient breathing techniques
learned in swimming.
Whatever statistics one reads, one sees that swimmers have a much
lower frequency of injury than participants in virtually any other sport. I
do not know of anybody of any age who cannot learn to swim, and I do
not know of anyone who has regretted doing so.
Jane Katz, Ed.D., is a professor of health and physical education at
Bronx Community College and John Jay College of Criminal Justice of
the City University of New York. Her academic achievements and her
experience as a member of international swimming and synchronized
swimming teams make her aptly suited to write an excellent,
instructional book on swimming. Swimming for Total Fitness gives, in
easily understood form, a program that will prepare the beginner for
pleasurable and beneficial swimming and that will also help the
experienced swimmer to sharpen his skills. Structures of the locomotion
system change continuously as we mature, but swimming is one activity
that can be performed with impunity at any age. Youngsters, busy
executives, homemakers, and other persons who want to engage in an
aerobic activity with an extremely low incidence of injury will derive
much benefit from studying Dr. Jane Katz's book and following her
program.
WILLIBALD NAGLER, M.D., F.A.C.P.
Physiatrist-in-chief, New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center
INTRODUCTION
It
t falls from the sky, and it comes out of the ground. Two thirds of your
body is made of it. It keeps your skin from wrinkling, flowers from
wilting. You wash with it, drink it, cook with it. Kids love to play in it,
wars have been fought over it. Three quarters of the earth is covered
with it. Some believe it cleanses the soul and purifies the mind. What is
it? It's water—and it's also what makes swimming unique in the world of
sports and physical fitness.
You know by now that exercise is good for you—physically, mentally,
even emotionally. But how should you exercise? As doctors in sports
medicine have focused more closely on sports-related injuries, they have
learned that some sports, although in some ways good for you, can also
be downright bad. How many runners do you know without shin splints,
for instance, or how many tennis players do you know who don't
complain of tennis elbow? And many sports seem like fun initially but
soon prove boring, or expensive, or limited in scope (or all three). No
wonder people hesitate to begin a program or, once they start, become
disillusioned and give it up so easily. Broken arms, bad knees, hours of
grueling, sweaty work, depleted bank accounts should not be the price
you have to pay for physical fitness.
And it's not if you swim! Swimming has something special: you do it
in water. And that's a plus. Water is the secret ingredient that makes
swimming better for you than any other sport. Did you know, for
example, that every time a runner's foot hits the ground his body
receives a shock of up to three times his or her body weight? (Multiply
that by 3,000 strides for every mile run, and you're talking about an
incredible pounding.) On the other hand, a swimmer's body feels as
though it weighs less in water, owing to the upward force of buoyancy.
And there's no jarring against any hard surface: there's only the smooth,
rhythmic motion through the water. That's not to say you shouldn't run
at all. But that extra wear and tear can add up over time, if dry-land
exercise is the mainstay of your fitness program. More and more people
are discovering that their feet, leg muscles, knees, and hip joints simply
cannot stand up over the years to that kind of constant pounding. That's
why swimming is the sport of the future—it lets you fulfill your fitness
quota without the harmful side effects that land sports can bring.
Swimming is the closest thing on this earth to a perfect sport. It
exercises all the major muscles of the body; it's the inexpensive, fun,
social, graceful, sensual, safe, gentle way to achieve fitness—and it's an
activity that you can enjoy for a lifetime. It can also be an athletic,
artistic, intellectual, and spiritual challenge, depending upon how you
want to go. So give swimming a try. But I warn you. You may never
want to get out of the water. You'll find swimming one of the few things
that successfully combine business (in this case, physical fitness) with
pleasure.
Swimming is still among the most popular sports activities in the
United States. According to the 1992 National Sporting Goods
Association, over 66 million Americans went swimming at least once
during the year. A 1990 Gallup poll affirms this participation: 38 percent
of those polled said they participated in swimming that year: followed
by fishing at 29 percent, running and jogging at 19 percent, and aerobic
dance at 13 percent. So come join us get in the swim!
WHAT SWIMMING WILL DO FOR YOU
Swimming has a lot going for it. But first I want to say a few words
about what sets it apart from all the rest—water. That's because an
appreciation of the water is one of the most important aspects of
discovering the joys and benefits of swimming.
What's so special about water? Plenty! First of all, how long and hard
will you work at something if you aren't deriving some pleasure from it?
Not very long and not very hard. The fact that something is "good for
you" isn't really enough in the long run. Whether it's running or
swimming-or eating your vegetables if you do it only because you
"should" and not because you like it, you'll soon find excuses for
stopping.
But water feels good and is good for your body and for your soul. In
water, our bodies seem to defy gravity, and we come as close as we ever
will to the feeling of flying. And water is a wonderfully sensuous
medium; just being in it is relaxing and exhilarating at the same time. In
water every motion seems effortless, our muscles relax, and our mental
walls seem to melt and float away.
Most people, no matter what their age, find water deliciously
pleasurable and soothing. When you're tense or you have an ache
somewhere-especially if you suffer from a back problem-don't you
think about how nice it would be to soak your troubles away in a
soothing whirlpool or bath?
But water's greatest advantage is its buoyancy. This buoyant quality is
the swimmer's secret ally. The buoyancy is always there—holding you
up while you're in the water, and keeping you feeling “up” long after
you've wiped the last droplet from your skin. Water lifts your spirits as
well as your body. After a swim, there's a euphoria that permeates your
entire existence for hours afterward.
But enough of swimming's seemingly magical properties. What will it
do for you in scientific terms?
It Helps Your Heart, Blood Vessels, and Lungs. Swimming is an
excellent aerobic (heart-pumping) exercise, which means that if you do it
regularly and vigorously enough to raise your heartbeat to 70 percent of
its Maximum Rate (see Target Rate, this page) for a half hour or more,
your cardiovascular system will gradually grow stronger and more
efficient. By making your system work this way (in a sensible,
progressive manner), you train your body to handle the extra demand,
and it even becomes able to function better under normal conditions,
when the strain is removed. This is known as the training effect When
you exercise aerobically, your lungs actually increase in size, capacity,
and efficiency. Your heart becomes more powerful, more fit with
exercise, just like any other muscle. Your blood vessels actually increase
in number, and they may even become more flexible, thereby
forestalling any tendency toward arteriosclerosis. Some studies also
indicate that aerobic exercise reduces the cholesterol levels in the blood
overall, and that it may alter the cholesterol that is found in the blood to
a less dangerous type. Other aerobic benefits include lower blood
pressure, improved digestion, a clearer complexion, and generally
increased alertness. Aerobic exercise can also help alleviate the stress
that can put a lethal strain on the heart, and, finally, if you're
overweight, the weight reduction that usually goes hand in hand with
vigorous exercise (more on this below) will further alleviate the strain
on your heart.
Swimming has this added effect: when your body is horizontal and
immersed in water, your heart is actually larger than when you're
vertical on dry land and it has to pump against gravity. As a result,
between 10 and 20 percent more blood is pumped with each heart
contraction. This effect gives you the potential to work harder and
longer than you ever could on land. And it makes swimming the ideal
(and sometimes the only) exercise available to those who suffer from
heart disease.
It Gives You Stronger, Firmer Muscles. Swimming is the single best
exercise for toning your arms, shoulders, waistline, hips, and legs all at
once. And since the water cushions and supports your body, your
chances of straining a muscle are greatly reduced.
It Increases Flexibility. Swimming's long, sinuous motions, along with
the increased range of movement that your body has in the water,
actually elongate your muscles while strengthening them. Swimming
will help loosen you up—both in the water and after you're out.
It's Easy on Your Muscles and Bones. One of the best things about
swimming is that it gives you all of the pleasures and benefits of
exercising without the troublesome and often painful side effects that
other sports can have on your musculoskeletal system. It's the whole-
body, all-around exercise that builds endurance and balanced muscle
strength, without jarring your bones and muscles. Because the resistance
of the water actually helps you exercise your muscles, because the
movements are relatively slow and rhythmic, and because you aren't
likely to collide with other people or with equipment—the average
swimmer has virtually no injuries to worry about. In fact, swimming's
the one exercise that doctors—especially sports medicine specialists—
unfailingly recommend to those who have sustained injuries in other
sports, or in life.
The fact that swimming puts a minimum of strain on the joints of your
body is especially good news for those with arthritis or chronic back
problems, since it's often the only exercise these people can perform. It's
also good news for those who want to avoid these problems in the
future.
It Helps You Lose Weight. In order to lose weight, your body must use
more calories than it takes in. Swimming will help greatly here (see this
page). And although light or moderate exercise can stimulate the
appetite, studies (and personal experience) have shown that strenuous
exercise may actually diminish your desire to eat. After a vigorous swim,
the last thing you'll want to do is stuff yourself. (That's why it's a good
idea to schedule a swim before the biggest meal of the day.)
More importantly, exercise helps raise your metabolism—the rate at
which your body burns up calories not only during exercise, but for
hours afterward. Even long after you're out of the pool, in other words,
your swimming will still be helping you to lose weight. Finally,
swimming is so relaxing that it may even help you control compulsive
overeating brought on by tension.
It's Good for Overweight Persons. If you're on the heavy side, your
adipose tissue makes you even more buoyant than your svelter
counterparts. This extra support is why you're more comfortable
swimming than doing any other sort of exercise. And being overweight
doesn't slow you down nearly as much as it does on land; in fact, some
swimmers—especially headline-making long-distance swimmers—have
an extra layer of fat for warmth.
It Aids Physical Therapy. Water's buoyancy also makes swimming an
excellent therapeutic exercise. It gradually and gently relaxes and
rehabilitates muscles and joints that for one reason or another have
atrophied or stiffened. Swimming is a sport that can be enjoyed by the
injured and by the handicapped. The therapeutic benefits of immersing
yourself in water are well documented, and doctors often recommend
swimming to their patients who need a gentle, soothing form of activity
for a temporary injury. Water is so safe, in fact, that nature uses it to
protect us during the most vulnerable time of our lives—while we're still
developing in our mother's womb.
It Helps You to Enjoy Other Sports and Other People. Your newfound
energy and endurance will allow you to enjoy dry-land activities such as
tennis or dancing till dawn. And love-making, too: the sensual swimmer
knows how pleasurable it is to use one's muscles to move through the
water; how it heightens physical strength, flexibility, and the awareness
of one's body. And this is not simply the power of suggestion, or wishful
thinking. Science has shown that swimming actually helps one feel
“sexier” temporarily by affecting the body's hormonal balance. A study
made of 258 swimmers (108 women and 150 men) found that 20
percent said they enjoyed a higher rate of sexual activity after they'd
begun to swim regularly.
It Slows Down the Clock. Lack of exercise is the most important factor
in premature aging. Our bodies actually thrive on use. Up to a point, the
more you do, the more you can do. In other words, use it or lose it.
Regular exercise can add years to your life. And if your sport exercise
is swimming, it can continue to help slow the aging process for as long
as you live. I've seen many persons sixty years and older who swim two
miles or more every day. You should see the shape they're in. Most forty-
year-olds would kill to look like that!
And did you know that some conditioned sixty-year-olds can swim 60–
70 percent as fast as conditioned twenty-year-olds? If you swim for
fitness, statistics show that you'll lose only about 1 percent of your
ability per year. And as the years go by you'll still be perfecting your
technique, so that it's actually possible that your performance will
improve over time.
It Provides Lifelong Satisfaction and Competition. First of all,
perfecting your swimming can bring you the unbeatable satisfaction of
mastering a skill. You don't have to be an Olympic swimmer to enjoy
pushing your abilities to the limit. You can always satisfy your urge to
compete by swimming against your previous times and distances, or by
racing informally with a group of friends. Or, thanks to the Masters
Swimming Program, begun in 1970, you can engage in an organized
competition against others in your own age group. The YMCAs and
YMHAs across the country have also instituted this popular swimming
program as part of their regular aquatic schedule.
The Masters Program is unique in that it provides recreational, social,
and competitive programs that people can enjoy throughout their lives.
Most other sports programs become too strenuous later in life, and the
competition with younger and stronger athletes becomes too frustrating.
But in the Masters Program, there are people in their eighties, nineties,
and even a centenarian or two competing in swimming meets
throughout the United States—and the world. So, not only can you be
swimming through the '90s; you can swim into your nineties!
It's Inexpensive. Swimming is an exercise that can fit everyone's
budget, since it can cost as little as the price of a bathing suit. And
swimming doesn't usually involve travel expenses, club membership, or
fancy equipment. All you need is water! In fact, a recent comparison
survey found that a swimmer spends less than half the money on
equipment that he would for any other sport.
It's Varied. So you think a swimming workout consists of jumping into
a pool and swimming away, lap after endless lap, for as long as you can?
Have I got news for you! Just turn to the workouts that begin on this
page, for a glimpse of how varied a swim can be.
First of all, there are four competitive strokes from which to choose
(crawl or freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke, and butterfly). Then there
are the recreational and resting strokes and skills (elementary
backstroke, sculling, sidestroke, and treading skills), plus their
variations. During a workout you can do each stroke while pulling (using
only the arms), or kicking (just the legs), or swimming (using both arms
and legs). You can vary the pace by swimming fast, slow, or in between.
You can swim against the clock or at your own internal pace. You can
swim long distances, short distances, or middle distances. You can try
equipment such as fins, kickboards, hand paddles, and pull-buoys (see
this page-this page). And for each stroke, you have any number of dives,
starts, and turns to practice each time you swim. And that's not even
counting water exercises, deep-water running, etc. So you see, unlike
many other aerobic or all-around exercises, swimming is anything but
monotonous.
SWIMMING IS WHAT YOU MAKE IT
You have your own special reasons for swimming. It can be for fitness,
appearance, pleasure, or all three. Your reasons may change over the
years, but no matter what your reason for exercising, fitness, as a friend
of mine once pointed out, is one of the few things in life that's fair.
We're all born with different levels of ability, but within our
limitations each of us has a tremendous amount of material to work
with. It's a shame when we don't work up to our potential. In order to
get into and remain in the best physical condition that he can be, that
rich guy over there with the two Rolls-Royces and the private swimming
pool has to work just as hard as that factory worker, hassled executive,
housekeeper, or you. In other words, regardless of who you are, you'll
get as much out of swimming as you put into it. What could be fairer
than that?
Life has its competitive moments, no matter how much you may try to
avoid them. And what you learn about yourself through swimming can
help you over the roughest spots. For one thing, you'll have to assess
your abilities objectively-past, present, and future. For another, the
discipline involved in sticking to a swimming program increases your
self-esteem. To see your distance grow, your skills improve, your body
strengthen—that's a good feeling. And your ability to set goals and to
achieve them will carry over into other parts of your life. Even if you
don't achieve all your goals, it's no disaster—that will help you develop
a healthy acceptance of disappointment as well as fulfillment.
Swimming can be as social or solitary an endeavor as you like. You
can join a team or swim club, go to meets and compete, and get your
friends and family involved. Or you can compete against yourself in
order to achieve strictly personal goals. You can reserve your swim as a
private little pocket of time that's yours and yours alone. What's great
about swimming is you don't have to spend time looking for a partner or
team, but if you feel like company, you have the option.
And swimming can be your answer to this modern-day poser: Is there
life without television? Here's one healthful alternative to the passive
life, or what I call “spectatoritis.” No more sitting around, waiting for,
and accepting the prepackaged material that someone else has decided
you want. When you swim, you become your own “live entertainment”
and become more of a part of life—a doer, instead of an observer.
I hope by now you're eager to take the plunge. But first you have to
know a few things about my program.
WHOM THIS BOOK IS FOR
This book is for you if:
• You're an adult who has tried to learn to swim in the past, but
without success.
• You can swim a little but want to learn swim skills better.
(Haven't you said or heard, “I can swim but I can't breathe"?)
• You're an accomplished swimmer who wants to review your
skills and refine your technique.
• You're a swimming instructor or coach who wants to improve
the effectiveness of your classes.
• You're a person who is looking for a progressive aerobic fitness
program.
If you don't swim now, this book will teach you how to swim—and
swim correctly. That's a promise. Over the past thirty years, I've used
these techniques with thousands of die-hard landlubbers of all shapes,
sizes, ages, and abilities.
So, whether you're young or just young at heart, a total beginner or an
experienced swimmer, whether you're swimming solo or with one or
more partners, or even if you need a competent guide to help you teach
others this book is designed for you.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
This book can be used in several ways, whether you want to learn how
to swim, to improve your skills at any level, to raise and to maintain
your level of fitness, or to compete:
By Yourself. Everything you need to learn is here, divided into easy-
to-understand progressive steps. Just follow the lessons and workouts
carefully, on your own. For safety's sake, though, always be sure there is
someone else around the water—preferably a lifeguard. Even the most
accomplished swimmers obey this rule: never enter the water unless
there is another person present who can help in case of an emergency.
Along with a Partner or Buddy. This is the best in terms of moral
support, fun, and incentive. It's always nice to have someone else
around, especially if he or she is at about the same level you are. A little
companionship, help, and reassurance make anything go easier and
faster, and swimming together can do wonders for a relationship. Instead
of a night on the town, try a Saturday night at the pool!
As a Guide to Help You Teach Others. Swimming instructors, my
fellow Masters fitness swimmers, and students alike have asked me to
write a book for years. (Stop bothering me already.) Here it is!
This book takes a careful, step-by-step approach to swimming and
fitness. Each lesson or workout builds the skills you've acquired in the
previous one. I indicate which skills and what level of fitness you should
bring with you to each level; you can find the place that's best for you to
begin the program. Similarly, you can progress as far as you want. I do
recommend, though, that no matter what level of swimming or fitness
you think you're at you:
• at least review “The Fundamentals of Swimming”
• end your program no sooner than Level 10 of the Intermediate
Phase
• consider progressing to the Advanced Phase and at least look at
the chapter on Super Workouts!
Part One, "The Fundamentals of Swimming," consists of ten lessons.
The first lesson goes right to the heart of the matter by teaching you how
to exhale underwater comfortably. This is the mainstay of swimming
well and the one thing that most people even those who know the
basics-have trouble with. The lessons in this section then go on to teach
you the basic prone and supine swimming skills, as well as how to dive.
So begin here, even if you were the star sprinter for your high school or
college swim team. Your strokes might have become a bit sloppy, your
memory of the finer points a bit shaky; your endurance might have
dropped way off; or you may have been doing something incorrectly all
along. Experienced swimmers can probably zip right through this
section. If you can, you won't have to spend much time on it. And if you
can't, it means it's a good thing you began here.
The lessons in this first section are also mini-workouts, designed to
improve gradually your fitness level along with your skills. Each one
becomes progressively more strenuous than the last, so that once you're
through with the fundamentals you're ready to follow the workouts,
which pick up where the fundamentals left off. These workout programs
have four phases—Beginners, Intermediate, Advanced, and a special
section of Super Workouts that has training tips and high-caliber
workouts similar to the ones that competitive swimmers use to get into
tiptop shape. The workouts gradually bring your distance up to 300
yards or meters (almost a quarter mile) for Beginners; 1,000 yards or
meters (over a half mile) for Intermediates; 1,800 yards or meters (over
a mile) for Advanced swimmers; and finally 3,000 yards or meters
(almost two miles) for Super swimmers—while they expand your
repertoire of swimming skills.
WATER, WATER EVERYWHERE
As for where to swim, there are facilities all over the place if you look.
The last time the National Spa and Pool Institute took a count (in
1991) there were a total of almost three and a half million outdoor in-
ground pools in the United States, and nearly three million outdoor
above-ground pools. And that's not counting innumerable indoor pools
and natural bodies of water—oceans, rivers, lakes, ponds, streams, bays,
and in quarries—that are just begging for you to jump in and have a
good time. As to when to swim, you can do it summer, winter, all year
round.
If you prefer a pool (which I recommend for learning, practicing, and
most workouts), you'll find that most facilities have low fees. Many
localities maintain public pools that charge nominal fees, if any. Call the
local Y, school board, community center, parks and recreation
department, community colleges, universities, or continuing education
programs. Or you might prefer to join one of