swimming science
Edited by G. JOHN MULLEN
optimizing training
and peformance
Δη
42
arms recovery: relative duration
Power to overcome drag:
Po = D*v
PD = 1/2*p*v2*S*Cd
Po = k*v3
Drag = 1/2*p*v2*S*Cd
the
science to
improve your
technique
swimming science
Contents
Introduction
CHAPTER ONE hydrodynamics
Tiago M. Barbosa
CHAPTER TWO technique
Rod Havriluk
CHAPTER THREE pool training
Rod Havriluk
CHAPTER FOUR dryland training
Allan Phillips
CHAPTER FIVE nutrition
Kevin Iwasa-Madge
CHAPTER SIX injury prevention and rehabilitation
G. John Mullen
8
12
40
68
96
124
152
APPENDICES
Notes
180
Glossary
185
Notes on contributors
189
Index
190
Table of measurements
192
Acknowledgments
192
Introduction
Swimming is a popular sport for people of all ages. Children are often first exposed
when they learn to swim for safety, perhaps starting with splashing and then doing
turns and tumbles, enjoying the feeling of weightlessness and the novelty of being
in water. In fact, swimming is a truly unnatural activity for humans, requiring
swimmers to be instructed from their first stroke.
Unlike any other sport, swimming requires athletes to move as rapidly as possible
through a medium more dense than air. The density of water makes the precision
of every action important, as the additional resistance of an improper action greatly
reduces swimming velocity. Understanding the science behind swimming therefore
enhances both proficiency and enjoyment in the sport.
Since appearing in the 1896 Olympics, competitive swimming has seen vast changes
in style, form, attire, and location. At first, swimming events were held in open water,
before switching to the pool in 1908. Male competitors wore full-body swim suits up
until the 1940s, and the nature of fabrics available at the time meant this significantly
increased the drag on the swimmer. Lane markers were not used before 1924 and
starts weren't incorporated until 1936. Swimming goggles were not allowed until
as late as 1976.
From across the globe, Swimming Science brings you the insights of leading experts in
physical, mental, technical, and tactical aspects of the sport. This book binds together
their significant findings with those of scientists who have parsed and studied every
element of swimming, most notably the original swimming scientist, Doc Counsilman.
Some discoveries were made in the nineteenth century and others as recently as this
year. A wide range of sciences is embraced here, as swimming involves a surprisingly
diverse array of disciplines. For example, at different stages of his career, Michael
Phelps-arguably the greatest male swimmer of all time-has relied on various aspects
of science to hone his swimming to ever more impressive levels. His technical skills,
strong work ethic, and training base were developed as a young swimmer in Baltimore,
With the help of advanced
swimming science Michael Phelps
became the most decorated
Olympian of all-time.
8 Introduction
Maryland. He has subsequently concentrated on physical preparation-a
key factor in his relatively injury-free career-and has cultivated a mental
toughness that has been severely tested under daunting pressure to win
multiple gold medals, resulting in amazing race finishes with Milorad Cavic.
Each chapter in this book deals with a different scientific discipline,
providing the reader with the background to better understand the sport.
A single solution doesn't work for every swimmer, so instead of offering
a panacea or list of drills, the authors present science-based approaches
that enable one to tailor solutions to individual situations. Chapter 1,
Hydrodynamics, breaks down how the water interacts with the body
during swimming. Understanding how to stay streamlined in the water
and how various joint positions create torque and power is essential in
the sport. The biomechanics of effective swimming strokes are dealt with
in Chapter 2, Technique. Unlike in other sports, technique is the greatest
contributor to success in swimming, yet remains the area requiring most
improvement, for the majority of swimmers. Some aspects of technique are
not included due to space limitations, such as kicking, breaststroke timing,
freestyle and butterfly arm recovery, backstroke finishes, relay take-offs, and
10 Introduction
turns. Chapter 3, Training, discusses the physiological demands of
swimming and how training influences swimmers' ability to deal with
these. Competitive swimming today requires a very high level of physical
performance, so Chapter 4, Dryland Training, delves into the science
behind improving fitness and strength through training outside of the
pool. Chapter 5, Nutrition, considers the optimal proportions of different
foods and fluids for swimmers to consume, to regenerate the body for
maximum performance. The sport's heavy physical demands can lead
to injury, so Chapter 6, Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation, addresses
the best ways of preventing or minimizing the risks of tissue damage.
Finally, each chapter includes a detailed look at how specialized
equipment-such as that used in computer fluid dynamics, kinematics,
and electromyography-has impacted swimming science, and the
photographic Science in Action pages show how the professional
sport has benefited directly from the application of scientific principles.
Whether you dip into the book for answers to specific questions or read
it straight through for an overview, Swimming Science reveals the science
at work when swimmer meets water.
Graphically speaking This book will
introduce you to the science that has developed
over many years of swimming practice, from
the fundamentals of hydrodynamics and body
biomechanics to the latest developments in
swimming technology.
11
Hydrodynamics play a significant role in the swimmer's performance.
This chapter provides insight into how the water interacts with the
swimmer and the forces acting upon the body. It examines the way water
flows around the swimmer and how the forces produced can have an
impact on the energy expended during swimming, and hence on the
swimming efficiency. Swimmers, coaches, and researchers spend a good
deal of time trying to understand how to optimize these key aspects.
Cutting-edge devices are used to assess the swimmers, making them
more efficient and improving their performance. These assessments can
encompass the way the body is aligned, swimwear, or small details such
as the position of the fingers during swimming.
chapter one
hydrodynamics
Tiago M. Barbosa
What is the free
body diagram
of a swimmer?
What are the
forces acting on
me when I swim?
To have a deeper understanding of the swimmer's hydrodynamics
we need to learn what the main forces acting upon the body
are and how they interplay. Ultimately, swimming acceleration
and speed depend on propulsive forces, resistive forces, and
inertial parameters. Propulsive forces are those related to the
thrust and forward movement. Resistive forces act opposite
to the swimmer's direction of displacement. The inertial
parameters are related to body features (anthropometric
characteristics).
Thrust is due to steady and unsteady flow patterns (see pages
16-17), and is the sum of propulsive drag, lift force, and the
jet vortex (see pages 28–29). The resistive force is also known
as total drag force and results from three components-friction
drag, pressure drag, and wave drag. Regarding the inertial
parameters, these include the swimmer's body mass and
the added mass of water.
Based on these external forces it is possible to model
the swimming stroke and make a rough estimation of the
acceleration-time and speed-time curves within the stroke
cycle (see pages 32–33). The swimmer does not move at a
constant speed-that is, with uniform motion. Instead, over
a stroke cycle, there are positive and negative accelerations.
The typical profile of these curves depends on the swimming
stroke, but in general positive accelerations occur when the
thrust is greater than the drag force-for instance, during
the pull phase. On the other hand, acceleration is negative
when the thrust is smaller than the drag force-for example,
during the arm's recovery. Therefore, one can swim faster
by increasing the thrust while keeping the drag constant,
by keeping the thrust constant and decreasing the drag,
or by both increasing the thrust and simultaneously
decreasing the drag force.
Free body This free body diagram shows
the applied forces acting on a swimmer's body
while moving through the water at a steady speed.
The lengths of the arrows are proportional to their
magnitudes. Here, the forward thrust Fthrust and
backward drag Fdrag are equal in magnitude, so
there is no net force acting to accelerate the swimmer.
The upward force Fup is a combination of buoyancy
and lift resulting from the swimmer's motion through
the water. It is equal and opposite to the downward
force Fmass, which is the swimmer's weight.
Fdrag
14 Hydrodynamics
Forces and inertia
Thrust
Fthrust
Thrust (positive force, acting in forward
direction) is the sum of several forces
produced by the swimmer, based on steady
or unsteady flows. These are propulsive
drag (caused by pulling the hand directly
backward), lift forces (caused by sculling
actions of the hands) and the jet vortex
effect, besides others. Thrust is produced
by both upper and lower limbs.
Even though the surfaces of the feet and
hands are the most important, there is
evidence that the forearm, upper arm,
shank, and thigh may also contribute to the
production of propulsive drag, at least in
some phases of the stroke cycle. 1,2
Fup
Drag force
Fdrag
Drag force (negative force, acting backward)
results from the collision between the
swimmer and the water molecules, and is
one of the main concerns for support staff
(sport analysts), coaches and swimmers.
The total drag force can be broken down
into three main components—friction drag
(or viscous drag), pressure drag (also known
as form or profile drag), and wave drag.
A great deal of effort has been made over
the decades to understand the role of drag
in swimming and how to minimize its effects.
This can be achieved by improving swimming
technique, designing new swimming apparel
(such as swim suits, caps, goggles) and
building pools with different specifications
of depth and width.
Inertial parameters
The two main inertial parameters are the
body's mass and the added mass of water.
A body's inertial mass is a measure of its
resistance to changes in velocity—that is,
to being accelerated. There is an inverse
relationship between acceleration and
mass according to Newton's second law,
F = m × a. Hence, the larger the mass m
of the swimmer, the smaller the acceleration
a for the same mechanical force F. The
mechanical force Fis the sum of the thrust
Fthrust and drag Fdrag.
Total inertial mass is the sum of the
swimmer's mass plus the added water mass.
When a body moves in water, it effectively
drags some surrounding water with it. As a
percentage of body mass, the added mass is
roughly 24% for women and 27% for men.3
Newton's second law equation becomes
F= (m + madded) × a. The heavier the
subject, the more added mass will be
carried, compounding the inverse effect
on acceleration.
Fthrust
15
What is the influence
of water flow on a
swimmer's displacement?
How does water
surround me as
I swim?
Water, like any fluid, is a substance that flows and deforms
when forces are applied to it. The way water flows around a
swimmer affects several forces that act on the body, including
the thrust (see pages 28–29) and the resistance (see pages
18-19). Fluids, such as water, are characterized by a set of
properties. The most important are the density (mass or quantity
of matter per unit of volume), and the viscosity (resistance to the
movement of particles in the flowing substance).
The flow can be steady or unsteady. A flow is characterized
as steady when there are no changes in the fluid velocity and
pressure at a given point of the body over time. Conversely,
if these properties change, the flow is unsteady. Both steady
and unsteady flows play determinant roles in the production
of thrust. 1
If the swimmer's limbs are moving at a constant or almost
constant speed, with no significant changes in direction, then
the water properties do not change over time and conditions are
steady. Under these conditions, there are two propulsive forces,
which are the drag and the lift produced by the hands and feet,
whose speed and orientation are constant (see pages 28–29).
On the other hand, when the swimmer's hands or feet
accelerate or change direction suddenly, unsteady flows are
created and this produces thrust. The speeds of the hands and
the feet increase over their underwater trajectories. The hands
accelerate from their entry into the water to their exit, and the
feet also undergo accelerations as they kick up and down. In
analyzing these unsteady conditions, we can assess the water
circulation around the body or the limbs and observe, for
instance, the generation of vortices.
Flow can also be described as laminar or turbulent. The flow is
laminar when the layers of fluid are well organized and parallel
to the swimmer's body. If the water layers show a random
organization then this is turbulent flow.
Let it flow When the layers of fluid are parallel and well organized with no
disturbance, the flow is said to be laminar. The velocity and pressure at each point are
constant, and the water around the body appears smooth. Laminar flow happens
typically at slow swim speeds—for instance, when gliding in the streamlined position
at a relatively low speed (A). At higher speeds, the water surrounding the body
appears increasingly erratic, and swirling masses called eddies are observed, notably
on the body edges. The water layers are no longer parallel—the flow is becoming
turbulent (B). The resistance drag in turbulent flow is significantly higher than in
laminar flow, so swimmers try to minimize turbulent flow as much as possible.
Laminar and turbulent flow
16 Hydrodynamics
Flow analysis
Steady as you go We can visualize steady and unsteady flows using
threads, or tufts, attached to the body (right).2 The swimming stroke is
recorded on video and the tufts' orientation inspected frame-by-frame. In
this way, changes in a limb's velocity and direction can be observed over the
course of the stroke. Extreme changes in the tufts' orientation from one frame
to the next suggest that the flow direction changed suddenly. The arrows in the
diagrams represent the speed and direction of movement of the hand, elbow
and shoulder. Air bubbles or dye can also be injected into the water, and used
for qualitative analysis of flow (below).3 Here, a swimmer is performing dolphin
kicks. Each time the feet change from upward to downward movement, or
downward to upward, there is a cluster of air bubbles. This allows us to
observe the water circulation and vortices due to the sudden change of
direction of the accelerated limb.
→ Speed and direction of hand
→ Speed and direction of elbow
→ Speed and direction of shoulder
Reynolds number
To assess how laminar or turbulent the flow is, we can calculate the
Reynolds number. This is a number that takes into account the water
density, velocity, body length, and viscosity:
Reynolds number
=
density x velocity × length
viscosity
A young swimmer around 12 years old has a Reynolds number of about
2,500,000 at top speed.4 For the men's 50 m freestyle world record
holder, who is taller and faster, the Reynolds number is much higher, at
around 5,200,000.
There is a critical Reynolds number value at which flow becomes turbulent.
This depends on body shape but, as rule of thumb, flow becomes turbulent
at about 500,000. In swimming, the transition from laminar to turbulent flow
occurs somewhere between 500,000 and 10 million, so the flow surrounding
a racing swimmer cannot be considered to be laminar.5
Variations across species
Human
Blue whale
Bacterium
Small fish
10-5 10-4 10-3
10-2
10-1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
Reynolds number
Large fish
Dolphin
Graphics not to scale
17
How does drag force
affect swimmers?
How does water
resistance affect
how I swim?
When an object moves through a real fluid such as water,
which has viscosity and compressibility, there is always some
resistance to overcome. This resistance is known as drag,
because the object drags fluid particles along as it moves.
Drag forces acting upon the body are a major concern because
they slow us down, and can significantly affect performance.
The magnitude of the drag depends on a set of variables. The
higher the fluid's density, the higher the drag, and this partly
explains differences in salt water and fresh water performances.
Water is about 800 times more dense than air, which means
drag impacts a swimmer far more. Body surface also affects
drag on a swimmer-the larger the area presented, the greater
the drag. But the top determinant is the relative velocity between
the body and the water-the faster you go, the more resistance
there is to overcome. Drag forces can be broken down into
three different components-skin friction drag (or viscous drag),
pressure drag (or form drag), and wave-making drag.1
Skin friction drag results from interaction between the water's
viscosity and the body's surface. The water layer in contact with
the skin sticks to it, and travels at the same speed as the body,
so the relative speed is zero. This is the boundary layer. The
next layer of water is decelerated by this layer, and so on,
progressively further from the body. The higher the skin friction
drag, the more water is dragged (or trailed) behind the body.
Pressure drag is related to the pressure difference between the
leading and trailing edges of the body. At the front, there is high
pressure where fluid particles are compressed. Particles then
flow around the body, and eventually separate from the body
at the boundary layer separation point. Beyond this, the flow
reverses, producing vortices and a low-pressure region. The
pressure differential means particles tend to move from the
front to the rear of the body, "pushing” it backward-that is,
producing pressure drag opposing the direction of movement.
18 Hydrodynamics
Wave-making drag reflects the energy needed to push the
water out of the way in swimming. As the body moves forward,
fluid tends to "pile up” at the front, while “hollows” are produced
in the rear, creating waves. Wave making decreases swimming
efficiency in two ways-first, it takes energy that could have
been used for forward movement, and second, waves reflected
from the pool walls collide with the swimmer, transferring
momentum and impeding performance.
Total drag The total drag on a swimmer D is the sum of the three components
skin friction drag Df, pressure drag Dp, and wave-making drag Dw. That is, D = Df +
Dp + Dw. Skin friction drag is directly proportional to swim velocity v, so it increases
as the swimmer gets faster in a 1:1 relation. However, pressure drag is proportional to
v2, and wave-making drag is proportional to v³, so these components increase very
steeply indeed with swim velocity.2,3 Pressure drag and wave-making drag in
particular are extremely sensitive to changes in body position, and so because
these factors increase so drastically at greater speeds—the faster the swimmer
goes, the more critical good technique becomes.
Drag
Drag forces acting on a swimmer
Swim speed
Wave-making drag
Pressure drag
Skin friction drag
Separation point
Streamlined form-smaller pressure drag
Smaller
wake of fluid
dragged
behind body
Boundary layer separation
occurs further back
Turbulent flow
Laminar
flow
Lower pressure
Smaller pressure differential
Unstreamlined form-greater pressure drag
Larger wake of
fluid dragged
behind body
Vortices
Lower pressure
Boundary layer separation
occurs further forward
Higher pressure
Turbulent flow
Laminar
flow
Higher pressure
Larger pressure differential
NEED TO KNOW
Total drag on a swimmer, D = 1½ p v² A Cd
where p is the water density, vis the velocity of the swimmer's body relative to the water,
A is the projected frontal area of the swimmer's body, and Cd is a dimensionless variable
(it has no units) called the drag coefficient.
Because the total drag is the product of density, velocity, area and drag coefficient
multiplied together, we can see that if any of these variables increases then the total drag
will be greater. Of these, swimming velocity is the top determinant of drag for a swimmer,
since the drag increases in proportion to 2.
Pressure effects If there were no boundary layer
separation point, the pressures at the front and rear of the body
would be equal and hence the pressure drag would be zero.
The closer the separation point gets to the front of the body, the
greater the pressure differential and therefore the pressure drag
will be. This means that the swimmer's position in the water
significantly affects the pressure drag a very well-streamlined
position allows the separation point to occur closer to the rear
(top image). However, a poorly streamlined position, with limbs
misaligned, causes the separation point to be further forward,
which much increases the resistance (bottom image).
19
computational fluid dynamics
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is a cutting-edge
technique used to model a swimmer's hydrodynamics.
It has origins in the aerospace industry, and was only
applied in sports, notably in competitive swimming,
during the late 1990s and early 2000s. Medicine,
architecture, automobile design, and biology are
other fields that frequently use computational fluid
dynamics. CFD allows us to visualize how fluid (air
or water) flows around a body, and to quantify key
parameters such as drag and propulsive forces.
The technique uses numerical analysis and a set
of algorithms to solve problems related to water
flow, which can help swimmers improve their
performance by understanding the effects of
changing body position, for example, or of using
different garments (swimwear, goggles, caps). For
instance, CFD can be used to model the effects of
different finger positions on thrust, or of different
swim suit designs on the drag force.
There are three main steps involved in performing an analysis
using CFD. During pre-processing, relevant data is collected
and prepared. Once these data are entered as a set of inputs,
then the simulation is run. Because of the complexity of the
calculations, the simulation is run on dedicated software.
Finally, during post-processing, the output of the simulation
is retrieved. For a given set of inputs, the output will be always
the same. But if we slightly change one or several inputs, the
output changes accordingly, modeling the effects of those
inputs in a real-world system.
A major advantage of CFD is that it is possible to test a wide
variety of inputs, until the best result is reached, with no need
of physical experimentation or testing. So instead of inviting a
swimmer to perform several trials in the pool under different
conditions, we can simulate the effects in silico-that is, using
software. Swimming performance depends on marginal
changes in a given technique or characteristic. To investigate
the effects of such small changes, CFD is more accurate than
Showing the flow Having imported the data and set the
inputs, the next step is to run the calculations. The time required
for this depends on the complexity of the model and domain, as
well as the computational resources available—it can take from
a few minutes to several hours. Once calculations are complete,
the results are checked-if errors are found, the inputs should
be adjusted and the simulation re-run. A visual representation
like that shown here highlights the body's geometry and the
way the fluid flows around it.
20 Hydrodynamics
Flow simulation
experimental testing, if properly conducted. The main drawback
is that if the inputs are not specific and accurate enough the
output will be less reliable. Hence, pre-processing is the step
that takes most time-making sure the inputs are accurate
increases the quality of the output. Another limitation of CFD
is the cost involved, because of the huge computational
resources needed to run the simulations.
Collecting data
Color by numbers Visual inspection of the flow is a qualitative
analysis. Besides that, it is also possible to retrieve quantitative data from
CFD simulations, such as the magnitude of the drag or propulsive forces,
and insights about the components that contribute to these. This graphic
shows the pressure drag on the forearm and the hand a warmer color
denotes a higher pressure on the region, measured in pascals (Pa).
smaller
pressure drag
Model subject In the initial pre-processing step, the swimmer's
body is scanned, either in part or as a whole. This generates the model body
to be analyzed. Next, the domain is set. The domain is constructed from a
mesh of millions of small tetrahedral cells and represents the volume of
fluid through which the body is to move. Now the mathematical equations
used to model the chosen conditions are selected. For example, specific
algorithms can be used to model a certain orientation of the body in the
domain, swimwear of a particular roughness, or a swim lane containing
water of specific temperature, viscosity, density and turbulence.
Pressure drag analysis
Pa
greater
pressure drag
-8500-7500-6500 -5500 -4500 -3500 -2500 -1500 -500
500 1500
21
Is drafting beneficial during
training, open water and
triathlon competitions?
Why is it easier
if I swim behind
another swimmer?
Optimal distance
Anyone who has swum a few laps in a pool trailing behind
a fellow swimmer will have felt that the effort is less than
swimming alone. This happens quite often in training settings
in competitive swimming, but also in open water and triathlon
events. The lower effort perceived when swimming behind
someone is due to drafting effects. The aim of the drafting
technique is to diminish the drag force. This happens when two
or more swimmers are in a close group and fairly well aligned.
Behind the leading swimmer, a region of slipstream is created,
as the wake of water is displaced at a similar velocity to that of
the swimmer. The slipstream region depends on the shape of
the body-humans do not have a perfect hydrodynamic shape
so the slipstream is rather big. The water flow over a swimmer's
body is typically turbulent (see pages 16–17), which means
that the pressure in the slipstream region is lower than in the
surrounding environment, creating a perceptible “suction effect.”
Drafting involves a swimmer staying inside the slipstream region
of a fellow swimmer in front. This is beneficial for both swimmers
when moving at the same speed. Because the swimmer behind
is inside a region of lower pressure in the slipstream (a “suction
region"), he or she needs to expend much less energy and
power to move forward.¹ Wave drag may also be reduced in
close-in drafting positions due to the decreased relative velocity
of the disturbed flow close to the lead swimmer, which means
smaller waves are created by the drafting swimmer.2
Drafting is also a benefit for the leading swimmer. As we saw on
pages 18–19, pressure drag is due to the pressure difference
between the leading and trailing edges of the swimmer's
body-a larger difference creates a greater pressure drag.
When a swimmer is trailing behind the leading swimmer, the
effect of the low-pressure region is reduced, and this therefore
decreases the pressure drag on the leader.
0.55 yd
(0.5 m)
Cd ≈ 56%
3.3 yd
(3.0 m)
Cd ≈ 65%
22 Hydrodynamics
5.5 yd
(5.0 m)
Cd ≈ 75%
6.6 yd
(6.0 m)
Cd ≈ 84%
Different strokes Does drafting affect the swimmer's stroke? To assess the
swim stroke, four parameters are often monitored: swim velocity, stroke frequency
(or cadence), stroke length (or amplitude), and stroke index (a higher stroke index
indicates more efficient swimming). A study comparing drafting and non-drafting
swimmers did find differences in the stroke mechanics.3 When drafting, the swim
speed, stroke length, and swimming efficiency (stroke index) were higher than
when non-drafting by 3.5%, 4.7%, and 7.15%, respectively. The drafting swimmers
kept a more even pace, and the stroke length and stroke index were enhanced
too. Conversely, the stroke frequency showed no significant difference between
conditions, especially in the last part of the swim distance. So, drafting appears to
keep the stroke mechanics more consistent during an event or training session.
Keeping your distance What is the optimal distance between swimmers to
enhance the drafting effect? The drag coefficient of the trailing swimmer increases
with distance, so that swimming 0.55 yd (0.5 m) behind another swimmer results
in a relative drag coefficient Cd of about 56% of that of the leader, while a gap of
6.6 yd (6 m) means the back swimmer's Cd is about 84% of the leader's.4 Drafting
at 0 yd (0 m) is no more beneficial than drafting at 0.6 yd (0.5 m)2—and in
fact being very close can be a liability as visibility is impaired by bubbles and
turbulence, and the possibility of hitting the feet of the leading swimmer affects
arm stroke trajectory. Based on this evidence, the distance between swimmers
should be more than 7.7 yd (7 m), so that all swimmers are under similar
hydrodynamic conditions. In open water events and triathlons, swimmers
should consider drafting when deciding race strategy, to help save energy.
Side drafting
1.1 yd (1 m)
Stroke length (m/stroke)
1.5
1.45
1.4
1.35
Swim velocity (m/s)
Drafting and stroke efficiency
1.3
1.25
50
100
150
200 250
300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
3.2
3.0
2.8
Stroke index-efficiency (m²/s)
2.6
2.4
50
100
2.25
2.15
2.05
1.95
1.85
50
100
44
42
40
38
Stroke frequency (strokes/min)
150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
150
200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
Side by side It's also possible to reduce the drag coefficient by swimming
beside another swimmer, although the reduction is only one third of the reported
value achieved when directly behind the leader.2 The optimal position is about
1.1 yd (1 m) to the side and behind the leading swimmer, so that the drafter's
head is level with the leader's hip.
26
50
100
150
200 250
300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
Drafting
NEED TO KNOW
Non-drafting
Average for drafting
Average for
Stroke index (SI)—the stroke index is an
overall index of swimming efficiency.
SI = velocity x stroke length
non-drafting
23
What is a swimmer's
hull speed?
► What is the fastest
I can swim?
Just like a boat, a swimmer moving over the surface pushes
water out of the way. In doing so, the swimmer compresses
the water particles and creates waves. Creating waves takes
energy, which is not then available to propel the swimmer
forward. So the swimmer is wasting energy that could
instead be used for more efficient displacement.
A wave has a crest (the highest point or peak) and a trough
(the lowest, deepest point). The amplitude is the height of
the wave, from the midpoint to a crest, and the wavelength
is the distance between two consecutive crests. As swimming
speed increases, the wavelength of the created waves also
increases. At a certain speed, the wavelength is equal to
the swimmer's height or body length-this is known as the
swimmer's “hull speed."
Taller swimmers have a higher hull speed. Younger swimmers,
because they are still growing, will increase their hull speed over
time.¹ Some researchers consider that, theoretically, the hull
speed is the maximum speed that a swimmer can reach.2
Others, though, have reported elite swimmers displacing at
speeds higher than their hull speed.3 In such cases, the
swimmer is effectively swimming uphill to ride the wave.
Swimming at hull speed (wavelength = body length)
Crest
Wavelength
So what are the relative benefits of swimming between two
crests at the hull speed, or of riding up the wave? It seems that
a pace enabling the swimmer to be between two wave crests
is more economical. The swimmer is not repeatedly hitting the
wave, and so is able to maintain a smooth and even pace.
Sprinters, however, are willing to expend more energy to ride
the wave, using some of the wave's momentum to help them
move forward. When this happens, wave drag drops
significantly and the speed can increase substantially.4
Over a full freestyle swim stroke, the hull speed probably shows
some slight variations.5 During the arm's entry the “hull” of the
swimmer is effectively longer because the arm is fully stretched
in front. Moreover, as the arm enters the water it may smash
the wave. However, once the arm is in the water, fully immersed
and moving through its underwater path, the “hull” length
corresponds to the swimmer's height once again, and the
head and shoulder immediately create a new wave.
Riding the wave The hull speed is the speed at which the wavelength of
the wave created by the swimmer is equal to the swimmer's height or body length.
On reaching the hull speed, the swimmer is “trapped” between the crests two waves
(top). In order to exceed the hull velocity, the swimmer must swim “uphill” to climb
the wave and ride it, which requires more energy (bottom).
Crest
24 Hydrodynamics
Trough
Body length
Amplitude
Hull and race speed comparison
Men's 400 m freestyle
Men's 50 m freestyle
Bronze medalist Vanderkaay 2% slower than hull speed
Bronze medalist Cielo 22% faster than hull speed
Silver medalist Park 2% faster than hull speed
Silver medalist Jones 20% faster than hull speed
Gold medalist Sun 0.1% slower than hull speed
Energy economics Sprinters are not interested in being economical and saving
energy. They want to be as fast as possible, and they spend as much energy per
unit of time as necessary to achieve this. For long-distance and middle-distance
swimmers, on the other hand, being economical is a key factor. Comparing the hull
and race speeds of the medalists in the men's 400 m freestyle at the London 2012
Olympics shows that both speeds are similar. For the men's 50 m freestyle, however,
the race speed is much higher than the hull speed. Florent Manaudou of France, who
won gold in the men's 50 m freestyle, and Sun Yang from China, who was the gold
medalist in the men's 400 m freestyle, are almost the same height-the French
swimmer is 6 ft 6.3 in (1.99 m) tall and his Chinese counterpart is 6 ft 5.9 in
(1.98 m). So, both have similar hull speeds. Nevertheless, Manaudou swam
21% faster than the hull speed, and Sun 0.1% slower.
Swimming faster than hull speed
Gold medalist Manaudou 21% faster than hull speed
Hull speed
Race speeds
NEED TO KNOW
The hull speed formula
hull speed
gravitational acceleration x body length
6.283
25
SCIENCE swimwear
IN ACTION
For more than a century, swimwear has been a major focus of interest,
research, and development for competitive swimmers