7YEIM
COACH BLYTHE'S
SWIM WORKOUTS
BLYTHE LUCERO
Technique
Swim Workouts
Contains 100 workouts
Practice sessions up to 2000 yards/meters
Learn technique focus points
MEYER
& MEYER
SPORT
TECHNIQUE SWIM WORKOUTS
DEDICATION
To all those amazing Barracudas
TECHNIQUE
SWIM WORKOUTS
Blythe Lucero
Meyer & Meyer Sport
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Technique Swim Workouts
Maidenhead: Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd., 2009
ISBN 978-1-84126-268-0
All rights reserved, especially the right to copy and distribute,
including the translation rights. No part of this work may be reproduced—
including by photocopy, microfilm or any other means—
processed, stored electronically, copied or distributed in any form whatsoever
without the written permission of the publisher.
© 2009 by Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd.
Aachen, Adelaide, Auckland, Budapest, Cape Town, Graz, Indianapolis,
Maidenhead, Olten (CH), Singapore, Toronto
Member of the World
Sport Publishers' Association (WSPA)
www.w-s-p-a.org
Printed by: B.O.S.S Druck und Medien GmbH
ISBN: 978-1-84126-268-0
E-Mail: info@m-m-sports.com
www.m-m-sports.com
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
...........
6
GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THIS BOOK
11
Working Out with a Purpose
Swimming Well
..................
..
11
.11
Correct Practice
12
Focus Points
Swimming Often
Your Workout Routine
When Enough Is Enough
12
..
13
.13
.14
Achieving Better Swimming
...........
...14
Measuring Progress
.15
Valuing the Process
16
GETTING STARTED
..
....17
Workout Terminology
..17
Workout Format
20
Summary of Drills
21
..
Freestyle Drills
...21
Backstroke Drills
27
Breaststroke Drills
33
Butterfly Drills
.39
WORKOUTS
..47
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
..47
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
.72
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
101
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
..129
CONCLUSION
.............
159
CREDITS
160
5
INTRODUCTION
6
INTRODUCTION
I have always been of the opinion that it is best for a swimmer to
workout with a coach present. I have developed this conclusion over
many years, first as a swimmer, then as a swimming teacher and
coach. This opinion has been reinforced frequently, both during my
own experience in the water, as an athlete in training, and then from
the deck, while observing the development of swimmers.
When a coach is part of the equation, there to design training
content and routines, guide the progression of development, and
provide motivation and challenge when needed, a swimmer can
concentrate on swimming! Of all the things a coach does, one of the
primary benefits lies in his or her ability to observe stroke technique
in terms of swimming efficiency. This is an important part of a
swimmer's progress at all stages of development. For beginning and
intermediate swimmers, the coach's observation is critical to
identifying technique errors, doing it early, and giving corrective
feedback long before those errors become habit. For advanced
swimmers, the coach's observation takes the form of refining stroke
technique, and providing reminders so the swimmer remains focused
on maintaining the most efficient style even during the most
strenuous training phase. I believe a coach's observation and
feedback facilitates the most direct path for a swimmer's
improvement.
There is an unspoken partnership between athlete and coach. In the
most successful of these relationships, both are engaged in all
aspects of the pursuit. A positive outcome comes from a situation
where both athlete and coach are dedicated to the training program,
committed to pursue improvement through specific and frequent
practice, and focused on the goal. I feel that it is really too much to
expect the athlete to do both jobs. Training can be extremely
demanding, and as if that is not enough, life is full of distractions
and responsibilities. Some days it is just easier for the swimmer to
say, "I'm sleeping in today,” “I'm getting out early,” or “I'm going to
skip that set,” if not for the fact that the he or she knows that the
7
coach is there on deck, holding up his or her end of the bargain. I
believe that a strong swimmer/coach relationship provides the
strongest foundation for good results from a training program.
Having made these points, there is something to be said for self-
guided discovery. If an athlete is successful in maintaining
motivation, taking on challenge and remaining focused on the goal,
the process of working on stroke technique can be a very valuable
experience. It takes a great deal of concentration and analysis to
isolate and identify stroke problems, and to refine stroke technique.
A swimmer who is able to do this well, and consistently, can find the
experience of working out on their own to be quite satisfactory.
Over the last 20 years, I have encountered quite a few requests for
workouts that swimmers can do on their own. I have provided
workouts to swimmers, on a temporary basis, to do on vacation, or
on work assignment out of town. Each time I have done so, I have
carefully prefaced the set of workouts with specific guidelines to the
swimmer.
I will do the same here:
In addition to conditioning, workout is your chance to practice
swimming right. It is of the utmost importance to pay close
attention to your stroke mechanics, and be very in tune with
what makes swimming more and less efficient. Without your
coach there to observe, it is now your job to identify and correct
stroke problems and continually refine your technique. You must
use your own senses to give you feedback. Above all, you must
promise not to lose sight of the fact that everyday you swim you
can learn more.
This is the first in a three book series, called “Coach Blythe's Swim
Workouts." This book contains technique-based workouts, designed
to help swimmers focus on the mechanics of swimming. The second
book in the series contains conditioning workouts, designed to help
swimmers build swimming capacity, strength and endurance. The
third book in the series contains challenging workouts, designed for
8
advanced level training. Swimmers may use the material in these
books to practice and train on their own, when the swimmer's coach
is not present, or to create their own training routine, with the
guidelines above. Also, these books can be useful to coaches looking
for workout content to use in the training programs they design for
their teams.
The 100 workouts in this book focus on increasing general swimming
efficiency by improving swimming technique. The workouts blend
stroke drills and drill/swim bridging sets, in a format that will help
build better technique, and build the endurance required to perform
that technique over time. Workouts in this collection total up to
2,000 yards/meters. Specific workouts are included for each of the
competitive swimming strokes. Each workout is designed as a
balanced practice session unto itself, with warm up, progressions of
technique work, progressions of effort and a cool down.
Without the intent of discouraging anyone taking up the wonderful
sport of swimming, this book is not a Learn to Swim manual. Users
of the book are expected to have basic water skills, including the
ability to be able to completely submerge and recover to a standing
position, float, tread water, and more forward with arms and legs.
As well as advanced beginner and intermediate level swimmers,
this book is also appropriate for advanced swimmers seeking a
“technique tune up,” in the journey toward more efficient swimming.
9
Getting the Most Out of this Book
GETTING THE MOST OUT
OF THIS BOOK
Working Out with a Purpose
Swimmers workout to achieve better swimming. Whether you define
better swimming as more swimming capacity, endurance or more
speed, better swimming is more efficient swimming. The workouts in
this book are designed with one purpose: to help the swimmer
increase swimming efficiency by making technique improvements. A
more efficient swimmer is able to expend less energy, and therefore
swim longer and farther with less fatigue. Swimming can then
become a more rewarding activity. A swimmer who can swim longer
without getting tired can then apply his or her attention and energy
to building a good base of endurance. With increased swimming
capacity, the swimmer may choose to train for faster swimming.
So, this collection of workouts is part of the process of becoming a
better swimmer overall. This process does not happen immediately. It
takes time, focus and practice. Patience and dedication are important
qualities to bring with you in this process. If attention and time are
given to swimming right, endurance, capacity for yardage and speed
will happen.
The basic formula to keep in mind is this:
SWIMMING WELL + SWIMMING OFTEN = BETTER SWIMMING
Swimming Well
The first element in the formula for better swimming is swimming
well. Swimming is mechanically complex, and it is easy to get
distracted with the effort that is initially required to get from point A
to point B. Remember that it is more important to be focused on
perfecting the mechanical aspects of swimming before turning your
11
focus to swimming more and more yards.
Technique Swim Workouts
CORRECT PRACTICE
A respected swim coach once said, “Doing a drill 99% correctly is
100% wrong.” That seems harsh, but it is true. If a swimmer
practices incorrectly, they are reinforcing poor technique. It is
therefore a top priority to practice each drill, each stroke, each set as
mechanically perfect as possible. At first it may seem very robot-like,
even unnatural. Give it a chance. Remember that every skill
improves with practice. Driving, typing and dancing are good
examples of skills that improve with practice. We start by practicing
them slowly, step-by-step. Then, gradually, they become comfortable,
even automatic. There comes a time when we realize that we are
performing a complex skill well, without thinking about it.
FOCUS POINTS
Each workout in this collection begins with a “Focus Point” to help
swimmers zero in on specific issues that the workout emphasizes,
through specially chosen drills and sets. “Focus Points” address
important issues including body position, kick productivity,
eliminating drag, improving feel for the water, alignment, swimming
in a core-centered manner, stroke coordination and leverage. It is
important to think about the particular focus point, or theme
throughout the workout, in order to get the full benefit of stroke
improvement exercises.
Each workout asks the swimmer to progressively build mechanical
skills into a complete swimming stroke. Each step of the way, the
swimmer should try to relate what he or she is asked to do to the
“Focus Point.” At times, it will be frustrating and confusing. Drills can
be awkward and clumsy at first. Again, remember to be patient, and
keep trying!
Sometimes the point of a particular drill can be elusive. If a particular
drill is continually not making sense to you, ask a coach for
feedback. Remember, the first step in becoming a better swimmer is
to swim correctly.
As the swimmer improves each aspect of his or her stroke, it
positively affects another. One by one the pieces will fall into place.
12
Getting the Most Out of this Book
Swimming Often
The second element in the formula for swimming well is swimming
often. It is important to create a good workout routine that you can
stick with. In addition to the considerations in this section, use your
knowledge of your own experiences with other physical activities,
and skill attainment to make a routine that works for you.
YOUR WORKOUT ROUTINE
It is well documented that frequency of practice is a key learning
strategy. This means that the more often we are exposed to the skill
we are trying to master, the faster the rate of learning. So, in general,
a swimmer who swims four or five days a week will improve more
quickly than a swimmer who swims once a week. This is something
to keep in mind when planning your workout routine. If there is too
much time between workouts, you will find yourself having to
backtrack and repeat activities in order to refresh your memory and
"feel” for the water, to regain the advances you made at your
previous workout. A workout routine that keeps practice sessions
closer together allows the swimmer's body and mind to hold on to
the forward steps taken at the previous workout, so that valuable
repetition will work to reinforce and strengthen the swimmer's
understanding and muscle memory, instead of first having to re-
establish it.
Workout frequency, however, must be carefully balanced with
recovery time. Swimming well requires the use of almost every
muscle in the body. It is a strenuous activity, especially as a swimmer
is working on building capacity. Without ample rest between
workouts, the swimmer cannot continue to adapt to the workload
over time. A swimmer who is constantly fatigued is less motivated
and less able to concentrate on the important skills they are
practicing. This means that recovery time is an essential ingredient in
becoming a better swimmer. So, in general a swimmer who swims
four to five days a week will improve, over the long term, more
quickly than a swimmer who swims seven days a week.
A workout routine of every other day is a good option for many
swimmers. Some swimmers do well with a schedule of swimming two
13
days in a row, then taking a day off. For some, swimming each
weekday, then taking weekends off works well. Developing a workout
routine that works for you will take some trial and error. It is also
something that will change over time as your skills and capacity for
swimming increases.
In general, it is important to take at least two days off a week.
Always consult a doctor before beginning a fitness routine such as
this.
WHEN ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
Sometimes, there comes a point where a swimmer has reached the
limit of benefit from a workout. These workouts are demanding on
two levels, both physically and mentally. It is easy to fall into the
trap of thinking that a workout of only about 2,000 yards is easy
enough to complete. Remember, completing the workout is only part
of the challenge. Benefiting from the content of the workout is more
important. To make sure this is happening, regularly ask yourself the
following questions during your workout:
Am I too tired to concentrate on the point of the workout?
Am I just doing empty yards?
If the answer to either question is “yes,” then, it is time to stop. Start
again tomorrow.
Also, if you find yourself struggling to make it through a set, you will
not be able to concentrate of the point of the set. So, if the distances
called for are overwhelming, cut them in half.
Achieving Better Swimming
By swimming well, and swimming often, a swimmer arrives at better
swimming. It is important to remember that achieving better
swimming is a process. It doesn't happen all at once, it occurs
gradually and continually. It is important to be aware of your
progress, and celebrate it along the way.
14
Technique Swim Workouts
MEASURING PROGRESS
Progress can be defined in many ways. Capacity for distance, and
capacity for speed are two ways to evaluate progress. Ultimately,
regarding this collection of workouts, progress in swimming efficiency
is the most important measure of improvement.
Measuring progress requires a starting point to be established, then
regular comparisons to that starting point must be done.
A swimmer's progress in terms of capacity for distance can easily be
measured in yardage:
How far can a swimmer swim, non-stop, compared to the
previous week?
How many yards can a swimmer complete in 10 minutes,
compared to the previous week?
Progress in terms of capacity for speed can be measured in terms of
time:
How long does it take to swim 200 yards, compared to the
previous week?
How fast can a swimmer swim 50 yards, compared to last week?
Improvements in yardage and time can reflect improvements in
swimming efficiency. An additional way to measure swimming
efficiency is counting strokes:
How many strokes does it take to cross the pool, compared to
last week?
Can the same number of strokes be maintained for four or eight
lengths in a row?
As a part of your overall plan, it is a good idea to measure progress
regularly, to insure that improvement is occurring and continuing.
Choose a regular interval at which you measure progress, for
instance once a week, or once a month. There should be enough
15
time between measures to allow for skills to develop and progress to
be build, but not too much time to continue practicing in a manner
that is not producing results.
If improvements are not shown, repeatedly when measuring
progress, it provides important feedback. The swimmer may need:
more time to practice each drill
to practice the drills more precisely
to change his or her workout routine to allow more recovery, or
more exposure
to consult a coach for observation and feedback
VALUING THE PROCESS
Improvement may not happen every single time you measure your
progress. This is natural. It is not the end of the world, and it is
certainly not any indication that you should give up your pursuit of
better swimming. Consider that swimming in and of itself is a
rewarding experience. It is good for you on all levels: physically,
mentally and emotionally. Notice the muscle tone that you are
gaining. Notice the things you work out in your head while you are
swimming. Notice the smile on your face after you swim. Your
swimming is time well spent. Enjoy every minute of it.
16
Technique Swim Workouts
GETTING STARTED
This collection of workouts is organized by stroke emphasis. The first
25 workouts focus on freestyle technique. The next 25 focus on
backstroke technique, then 25 on breaststroke technique, and 25 on
butterfly. It is important to be familiar with the presentation of the
workouts to get the most benefit from them. This section defines the
terminology used within the workouts, describes the format in which
the workouts appear, and finally, provides a summary of the
technique drills that are called for within the workouts.
Workout Terminology
It will be important to be familiar with the following terms and
swimming jargon used throughout this collection of workouts,
appearing here in alphabetical order:
25, 50, 75, 100, 200:
Refers to the distance to be done in terms of a 25 yard/meter
pool. A 25 would be one length, a 50 would be two lengths, a
100 would be four lengths, etc.
4 X 25:
Refers to the number of times a distance is to be done, for
instance, in this example, 25 yards will be done four times
50 Easy:
A short recovery swim, and a chance to reflect on the set that
you just finished
Alternating 25s (or 50s) of:
Calls switching between two activities after a specific distance
Arms Leading:
The floating position with the arms extended over the head
17
Technique Swim Workouts
Cool Down:
The final exercise period of easy, continuous swimming that is
important to gradually return the heart to its regular rhythm, and
rinse out the muscles
Count Strokes:
Counting the total number of strokes it takes per length of the
pool
Drill:
An exercise designed to practice a specific skill or aspect of a
stroke correctly
Drill/Swim:
An exercise that begins alternates drill and swim, in order to use
the skills emphasized in the drill in practice while swimming the
full stroke
Fast Freestyle (or other stroke):
Using a faster tempo, and applying more power to move across
the pool faster than usual
Flutter Kick:
The kick done with Freestyle and Backstroke, using an
alternating leg action
Focus Point:
The theme or emphasis of the workout
Head Leading:
The floating position with the arms at the side of the body
Kick:
Leg action only. A kickboard may be used for front flutter kick, or
breaststroke kick, however, backstroke kick and dolphin kick
should always be done without a kickboard.
18
Workout Terminology
Kicking is an excellent aerobic activity and an important way to
build swimming endurance
Kick-other than breaststroke kick:
Any kick other than breaststroke kick. The reason for this is that
breaststroke kick should only be done when the knees are
completely warmed up to avoid injury
Pull:
For freestyle only. Using a pull buoy to float your lower body,
practice the upper body action of the stroke, including arm
stroke, roll, alignment, and use of core
Stationary Drill:
A drill that is done without covering distance in the pool
Swim:
An exercise using the full stroke as specified
Underwater streamlined kick:
Kicking while totally submerged, arms extended and tight over
the ears, chin tucked, core engaged to be as streamlined as
possible
w/15 SR:
Refers to the amount of rest (R) in seconds (S) between swims.
For example, in this case: with 15 seconds rest
Warm up:
Initial exercise period of sustained, medium intensity swimming
lasting at least ten minutes, or at least 10% of your total
yardage. Also an opportunity to review what you covered in your
previous workout, and to refresh your “feel” for the water
Your Choice:
Swimmer chooses the stroke or drill
19
Technique Swim Workouts
Workout Format
Each workout begins with a Focus Point, and ends with the total
yardage. Focus Points are designed to orient the swimmer to the
theme, or goal of the workout. Total yardage is included as one
measure of a fitness routine. All of the workouts in this book total
about a mile, some a little more, some a little less. It is important to
remember, however, that the main measure of this collection of
workouts is not miles swum, but improvement in swimming
technique, and increased swimming efficiency.
Workout content is presented in a sequential for-one activity after
the other, using a standardized set of directions. Each activity or
set appears as a string of commands. Figure 1 diagrams these
commands.
1. First, the type of activity
is stated, followed by a
colon, like this:
2. Next, the distance and,
if more than one, the
quantity of repeats is
stated.
Swim:
Kick:
4 X 50
300
Freestyle
your choice
3. Then, the actual activity
is stated, like this:
W/15 SR
-align entry forward
Drill/Swim:
200 alternating 25s of
"Catch Up"/Freestyle
6. When a double space
between activities or
sets appears, it means
take a rest, reflect on
the activities you have
done and prepare for
the next one.
-always one hand reaching
5. Points of emphasis for
the activity are stated
next, following a dash,
like this:
4. Next, if it is a set with
repeats, the rest is
stated, like this:
Figure 1 Explanation of workout format
20
Freestyle Drills
Summary of Drills
Drills are a primary component of this collection of workouts. Drills are
a way to work on a stroke, or a particular aspect of a stroke by
isolating, emphasizing or repeating an exercise. The following drills are
called for by name within the workouts, appearing in quotes. In this
summary, they are grouped by stroke, and are listed in alphabetical
order. Each drill is accompanied here by a brief description of how to
perform it, and its purpose. It is important to study the drills and
understand how to do them correctly to get their full benefit.
Most of these drills are also described in complete detail in the book,
“The 100 Best Swimming Drills,” also by Blythe Lucero. The book is an
excellent resource to accompany this collection of workouts. In addition
to step-by-step descriptions, each drill is illustrated, and its purpose is
clearly outlined. Feedback charts also follow each drill, to address
common problems that can interfere with feeling the point of the drills.
FREESTYLE DRILLS
3 Kick Switch – To feel the rolling action of the stroke, kick on side for
three kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your side, face in the water,
then switch sides, and arm positions, and repeat (see Figure 2)
Figure 2
Kick in a side floating position, then switch sides and resume an
aligned float and Kick
21
Technique Swim Workouts
6 Kick Switch – To feel length of stroke and alignment, kick on side
for six kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your side, face in the
water, then switch sides, and arm positions, and repeat (see Figure 2)
12 Kick Switch – To feel alignment, the rolling action of the stroke,
and the length of the stroke, kick on side for twelve kicks, low arm
leading, other arm at your side, face in the water, then switch sides,
and arm positions, and repeat (see Figure 2)
3 Strokes, 3 Kicks - To emphasize the rolling action of the stroke,
take three regular freestyle strokes with kicking, then kick only in the
side floating position, low arm leading, other arm at your side, for
three extra kicks, face in the water, then do three more freestyle
strokes, then kick only floating on the other side for three extra
kicks, and repeat
3 Strokes, 6 Kicks – To emphasize the rolling action of the stroke,
and constant kicking, take three regular freestyle strokes with
kicking, then kick only in the side floating position, low arm leading,
other arm at your side, for six extra kicks, face in the water, then do
Figure 3
Avoid leading your stroke off
course with a "collapsed wrist"
Point forward, in the direction
you are going, with your thumb
22
Freestyle Drills
three more freestyle strokes, then kick only floating on the other side
for six extra kicks, and repeat
All Thumbs Drill Freestyle arm stroke extension actively pitching
the wrist so the thumbs point in the direction you are swimming for
better alignment and catch (see Figure 3)
Catch Up - Like regular freestyle, except one arm catches up to the
other in front, emphasizing that one arm should always be reaching,
and the other stroking. Start with both arms leading, then do a
complete freestyle stroke with one arm, when both arms are back in
the leading position, do a freestyle stroke with the other arm,
continue
Dead Arm Freestyle - Single arm freestyle with the still arm at your
side, breathing toward the still arm side, to practice using hip
rotation to breathe
Fist Freestyle Freestyle
with fists, using the
forearms to press against
the water to develop a high
elbow arm stroke
Floppy Hand Drill – Regular
freestyle except during each
recovery, flop the hand
back and forth to check for
relaxation
Freestyle with Dolphin
Regular freestyle arms with
a dolphin kick each time
your hand strikes the
water in front, to practice
coordinating the arm and
leg actions (see Figure 4)
Figure 4
Freestyle with dolphin.
Coordinate the downbeats
of your feet with your catch.
23
Technique Swim Workouts
Head Lead Kick - Flutter kick
with your arms at your sides
to practice positive floatation
Heads Up Freestyle Rapid
freestyle with your head up,
as used in water polo, looking
straight ahead to practice
catching water and constant
kicking
Hip Skating Regular
freestyle with an imaginary
ice skate on each hip bone
in front. Achieve a skating
rhythm to practice core
leverage. Eventually try to
feel the blade of the skate
extending all the way from
the hip to the fingertip of
the reaching hand to feel
leverage and alignment at
the same time (see Figure 5)
Figure 5
Skate on your hips
Log Roll - Floating in a head lead position, and kicking, do a quarter
roll, hold for 5 seconds, do a quarter roll, continue, generate actions
from the hips and stabilize from the core to practice core-centered
swimming
One Arm Freestyle - Single arm freestyle with the still arm leading to
isolate the arm stroke action
One Leg Kick – Using a kickboard, kick rapid flutter kick with one leg
only to develop a productive kick
24
Freestyle Drills
Pendulum – To feel
core leverage, switch
rhythmically, like a
pendulum, from one side
floating position, with low
arm leading, and other arm
in high elbow recovery
position, to the other side,
continue (see Figure 6)
Figure 6
Feel the pendulum effect
Pull/Push Freestyle - Regular freestyle isolating the pulling motion
from full extension to the shoulder, and the pushing motion from the
shoulder to the end of the stroke past the hip (see Figure 7)
PULL
PUSH
Figure 7
The path of the freestyle arm stroke underwater
25
Technique Swim Workouts
Sculling - Tracing a sideways figure eight with the hands, press out
with thumbs down, press in with thumbs up, in order to develop
better "feel” for the water
Shark Fin To practice a well-balanced recovery, float in on your
side, low arm leading, kick steadily, and raise the elbow of the high
side recovering arm to a high pointing position, count to five, then
return arm it to your side, continue
Underwater Streamline Kick – Underwater kicking with arms leading
in a tight, narrow body position silhouette, using a quick, compact
kick to learn to eliminate drag (see Figure 8)
N
Figure 8
Compact kicking underwater in streamline
Vertical Kicking - Stationary flutter kicking in deep water from a
vertical position, vigorously enough to keep the face out of the
water, to develop a productive kick
26
Backstroke Drills
BACKSTROKE DRILLS
Armpit Lift – Exaggerating the roll of the backstroke, by lifting the
armpit completely out of the water when the arm is at the highest
point of recovery, to feel that the high recovering side provides
leverage to the low stroking side of the body (see Figure 9)
Figure 9
Lift your armpit at the high point of recovery to feel
the leverage of the stroke
Backstroke 3 Stroke Switch – To feel the rolling action of the stroke,
kick on side for three kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your side,
face up, then switch sides, and arm positions
Backstroke 6 Kick Switch – To feel alignment, and the length of the
stroke, kick on side for six kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your
side, face up, then switch sides, and arm positions
Backstroke 12 Kick Switch – To feel alignment, the rolling action of
the stroke, and the length of the stroke, kick on side for twelve kicks,
low arm leading, other arm at your side, face up, then switch sides,
and arm positions
27
Technique Swim Workouts
Backstroke Balance Drill with Cup – Regular backstroke with a cup
filled halfway with water balancing on your forehead to emphasize
that the head should be still, while the body rolls smoothly through
the stroke
Breathing Pocket – Regular backstroke exaggerating the roll to feel a
barrier from the water when the shoulder is at its highest point, and
using this moment to inhale
Boiling Water Drill
Rapid and productive backstroke kicking to
practice pushing the water upward with force, so it makes a
continuous boil, without the feet breaking the water's surface (see
Figure 10)
Figure 10
Make the water boil by snapping your foot upward, but without
breaking the surface of the water
Clock Arms - First done standing in front of a mirror, practice feeling
the correct hand entry position at shoulder width or wider (at least
11:00 and 1:00). Repeat while swimming backstroke
Corkscrew One stroke freestyle, then one stroke backstroke,
continue, feeling the deep catch of the backstroke accomplished by
rolling into your stroke
28
Backstroke Drills
Cup on Forehead
Quarter Turn - To achieve
a still or “independent
head,” do head leading
backstroke kicking, with
a cup half filled with
water balancing on your
forehead. Every twelve
kicks, rotate your body a
quarter turn, without
dropping the cup. First
to left, then back to flat,
then to right, then back
to flat, continue (see
Figure 11)
Figure 11
Achieve an “independent head"
Fist Backstroke – Backstroke with fists, using the forearms to press
against the water to develop a high elbow arm stroke
Float on Spine - Stationary drill where you practice the “banana
position,” a firm back floating position, where you achieve a straight
spine by rolling pelvis forward and contract the abdominals, so it
feels like you are in shaped sort of like a banana on your front, but
very straight on your back (see Figure 12)
Figure 12
Float on your spine and achieve the banana position
29
Technique Swim Workouts
Locked Elbow Recovery Drill
locked elbows for better alignment and stroke balance
Backstroke, recovering with actively
No Knees Streamline Kick – Hand leading backstroke kicking. Check
for over-bent knees by holding a kickboard with one hand on the
water's surface over the knees. If the knees bump the board, you are
raising your knees up, rather than dropping your heel
One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke Single arm backstroke, with still
arm at your side, trying to isolate the pulling motion from full
extension to the shoulder, and the pushing motion from the shoulder
to the end of the stroke past the hip (see Figure 13)
PUSH-
PULL
Figure 13
The path of the backstroke underwater
30
One Arm Rope Climb – Floating on your back, with a lane line or rope
beside you, take hold of the line and pull your body past the point
where you are holding, simulating the feeling of efficient backstroke
Opposition Freeze Frame Regular backstroke, stopping at various
times in the stroke to feel the many balance points of the opposing
arm stroke
Pigeon Toed Kicking Backstroke kicking with the feet and knees
turned slightly inward to a pigeon toed position to achieve a larger
foot surface to push water upward, and less drag from knees
breaking the surface
Backstroke Drills
Puppy Ears
Regular backstroke, pitching the hands actively
outward from the wrist during recovery, like a puppy's ears, to
maintain a relaxed hand, rather than an inwardly pitched “collapsed
wrist." Achieving a positive wrist position will set up an aligned entry
and good catch (see Figure 14)
Figure 14
Pitch your hand outward during
recovery for a well-aligned
entry and good catch
A "collapsed wrist” leads to an
over-reached entry and poor
catch position
Rhythmic Breathing – Practicing patterns of breathing in backstroke,
including inhale on one stroke, exhale on the other, inhale and
exhale during each recovery, and, inhale during one stroke cycle, and
exhale on the next, in order to include rhythmic breathing as a
regular part of your backstroke
Roll, Pull/Roll, Push
Regular backstroke feeling that the
continuous rolling action provides momentum and leverage to the
pull and the push of the arm stroke. Roll down to catch and pull, roll
up to transition and push
Two Step Recovery Regular backstroke, practicing an aligned
recovery by doing a half recovery, returning in a controlled manner to
the starting position, then doing a whole recovery
31
Technique Swim Workouts
Up and Over Practicing the path of the backstroke arm stroke,
where you catch deep then move your hand up and over your
stationary elbow, then press the hand past the hip (see Figure 15)
Figure 15
Sweep your hand up and over your elbow, past your shoulder
Vertical Kicking - Stationary flutter kicking in deep water from a
vertical position, vigorously enough to keep the face out of the
water, to develop a productive kick
Waterline Drill Stationary drill where you practice achieving
a neutral head position, with the waterline surrounding your face and
covering your ears, for best backstroke floating position
32
Breaststroke Drills
BREASTSTROKE DRILLS
2 Kick Breaststroke - To begin to bridge drill to swim, but to still
emphasize that each stroke begins and ends in a streamline position,
float in a hand lead position and do three breaststroke kicks in a
row, then one complete stroke cycle of arm stroke, breathing, kick
and glide, and repeat
3 Kick Breaststroke – To emphasize that each stroke begins and ends
in a streamline