The
Swim Coaching
Bible
Dick Hannula
Nort Thornton
Editors
저
Human Kinetics
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The swim coaching bible / Dick Hannula, Nort Thornton, editors.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-7360-3646-6
1. Swimming—Coaching. I. Hannula, Dick, 1928– II. Thornton, Nort, 1933–
GV837.65.S95 2001
797.2'1—dc21
ISBN-10 (Print): 0-7360-3646-6
ISBN-13 (Print): 978-0-7360-3646-7
ISBN-10 (Adobe PDF): 0-7360-8156-9
ISBN-13 (Adobe PDF): 978-0-7360-8156-6
Copyright ©2001 by Human Kinetics, Inc.
00-054241
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography,
photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without
the written permission of the publisher.
Developmental Editor: Julie Rhoda; Assistant Editor and Copyeditor: Carla Zych; Proofreader:
Bob Replinger; Graphic Designer: Robert Reuther; Graphic Artists: Kimberly Maxey and Brian
McElwain; Photo Manipulation; Brian McElwain; Photo Manager: Clark Brooks; Cover Designer:
Keith Blomberg; Photographer (cover): ©SportsChrome East/West; Photographer (interior): Please
see page viii for credits; Art Manager: Craig Newsom; Illustrator: Roberto Sabas; Printer: United
Graphics
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts
can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.Human Kinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076
Champaign, IL 61825-5076
800-747-4457
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com
Canada: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: orders@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics
207 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com
10 9 8 7 6
Australia: Human Kinetics
57A Price Avenue
Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
08 8277 1555
e-mail: liaw@hkaustralia.com
New Zealand: Human Kinetics
Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
North Shore City
Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
THE SWIM COACHING BIBLE
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton, Editors
Endorsed by the World Swimming Coaches Association
WSCA
WOALSWING ASSOCIATION
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments vii
Introduction ix
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton
Establishing Priorities and Principles
PART I
1
Chapter 1
Believing in Belief
3
Richard Quick
Chapter 2
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
9
Jean Freeman
Chapter 3
Coaching With Integrity
23
Peter Daland
PART II
Directing a Program to Its Full Potential
33
Chapter 4
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
35
John Leonard
Chapter 5
Administering and Marketing a Winning Program
51
Jack Bauerle
Chapter 6
Developing a Successful Team
65
Skip Kenney
Chapter 7
Maximizing a Swimmer's Talent Development
71
Bill Sweetenham
PART III
Creating Effective Practice Sessions
97
Chapter 8
Long- and Short-Range Planning
99
Jill Sterkel
Chapter 9
Putting Science Into Practice
111
Bruce R. Mason
Chapter 10 Applying the Art of Coaching
121
Deryk Snelling
PART IV Teaching Stroke Techniques
133
Chapter 11
Freestyle Technique
135
Rick DeMont
Chapter 12 Backstroke Technique
151
Dick Hannula
Chapter 13 Butterfly Technique
163
Pablo Morales
Chapter 14 Breaststroke Technique
179
David Salo
Chapter 15 Starts, Turns, and Finishes
189
John Trembley
PART V
Training for Optimal Performance
207
Chapter 16
Freestyle Sprint Training
209
Michael Bottom
Chapter 17 Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
221
Doug Frost
Chapter 18 Freestyle Distance Training
239
Dick Jochums
Chapter 19 Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
269
Eddie Reese
Chapter 20 Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
283
Bill Rose
Chapter 21 Breaststroke Training
297
Jon Urbanchek
Chapter 22 Individual Medley Training
309
Dick Shoulberg
Chapter 23 Relay Training
319
David Marsh
Chapter 24 Power Training
327
Randy Reese
Chapter 25 Preparing to Excel in Competition
335
Don Gambril
About the Editors 349
About the Contributors 350
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton would like to acknowledge and thank
all the chapter authors of The Swim Coaching Bible for contributing their
great knowledge and experience. All of them were willing to share their
talents and to give back to the entire swimming community. Their time
and effort made this book a success.
vii
PHOTO CREDITS
All photos provided by contributors unless otherwise noted.
Pages 3 and 356 (Richard Quick) © David Gonzales
Pages 9 and 352 (Jean Freeman) © Eric Miller, Women's Athletics, Uni-
versity of Minnesota Athletic Department
Pages 23 (Peter Daland) and 35 (Doc Counsilman) Courtesy of Interna-
tional Swimming Hall of Fame
Pages 51 and 350 (Jack Bauerle) Courtesy of University of Georgia Ath-
letic Department
Pages 99 and 359 (Jill Sterkel) and 269 and 357 (Eddie Reese) Courtesy
of University of Texas Athletic Department
Pages 111 and 355 (Bruce Mason, PhD) Courtesy of Australian Sports
Commission
Pages 163 and 356 (Pablo Morales) Courtesy of San Jose State University
Sports Information Office
Page 179 (David Salo) Courtesy of Dan Albano/Orange County Regis-
ter
Pages 189 and 360 (John Trembley) Courtesy of University of Tennessee
Athletic Department
Pages 209 and 350 (Michael Bottom) © Scott Greenwood
Pages 221and 352 (Doug Frost) Courtesy of World Swim Coaches As-
sociation
Pages 297 and 361 (Jon Urbanchek) Courtesy of University of Michigan
Athletic Department
Pages 319 and 355 (David Marsh) Courtesy of Auburn University Ath-
letic Department
Page 351 (Peter Daland) Courtesy of American Swim Coaches Associa-
tion
Page 358 (Dick Shoulberg) © Gabrielle Russomagno
viii
INTRODUCTION
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton
What has brought the greatest change in swim coaching over the past 50
years or so? It would have to be the increase in knowledge made avail-
able through various reference sources for swim coaches.
We can remember being fascinated, as young swimmers and then as
young coaches, by what the more famous American swimming coach-
es—Bob Kiphuth of Yale, Matt Mann of Michigan, Mike Peppe of Ohio
State, and many others—had to say about swimming and training. We
would read and listen to everything we could find about the training
philosophies of the great coaches—George Haines, Peter Daland, Don
Gambril, and Doc Counsilman—and could hardly wait for Swimming
World magazine to arrive each month so we could read the "How They
Train" columns. One of us even corresponded with the great Australian
coach Forbes Carlile at his Ryde Club in Australia, in an effort to soak
up every bit of swimming knowledge possible.
Books, clinics, and magazine articles have always been great sources
for cutting-edge coaching information. In swimming, there is a great
willingness on the part of coaches to share information. Coaches in all
the leading swimming nations have the attitude that as each swimmer
gets faster the expectation level of all swimmers is raised, that in this
way all of swimming will get faster. This attitude was apparent when we
approached potential contributors to this book and asked each to write a
specific chapter. Every coach accepted on the first request. The advance-
ment of the quality of coaching was their primary consideration.
When we began to talk about the possibility of putting this book to-
gether, we were very excited at the prospect of having the top coaches
of today write a chapter on the topic that they are best known for. Each
of the coaches who contributed to this book is tremendously successful
in his or her own right; each does many things well and could easily
put out an entire book filled with knowledge gained from his or her ex-
periences. The beauty of this book is that it features an all-star cast—a
smorgasbord of superstars.
The Swim Coaching Bible is a compilation of the best written material
ix
INTRODUCTION
of some of the world's most successful swim coaches into a one-source
reference book. We have gathered the best available writing on topics
of importance to produce a work that we hope will serve as a guidepost
for swim coaches around the world as well as an invaluable source
for swimmers and parents who want to know more about competitive
swimming.
The coach-contributors were given free rein within their assigned
topics. They were free to develop that topic in whatever way they felt
necessary to attain the best results. The overlap of some of the contribu-
tors' information was considered a necessary consequence of allowing
many coaches to share their roads to success. There is a tremendous
amount of individual and collective knowledge in this book. If you use
this book as a reference, we are certain that you will find what you are
looking for today and will revisit the book many times in the future for
information and opinions on totally different topics.
The contributors we've selected offer a diverse assortment of views,
experiences, and nationalities. Most of the chapter authors coach in the
United States. Three contributors—Bill Sweetenham (chapter 7), Bruce
Mason (chapter 9), and Doug Frost (chapter 17)—hail from Australia.
Deryk Snelling (chapter 10) has coaching roots in both Canada and Great
Britain.
The wisdom and experience of the contributors has been proven by the
success of their swimmers. Almost all the authors have either coached
Olympic gold medalists or have acquired gold medals themselves as
swimmers. Richard Quick, Mike Bottom, Doug Frost, and Jon Urbanchek
have coached individual Olympic champions as recently as the Sydney
Olympics.
We've organized The Swim Coaching Bible into five sections. Part I
establishes priorities and principles necessary for the foundation of any
swimming program. Richard Quick leads off in chapter 1 with “Believing
in Belief." One of the most successful coaches in the world, the Stanford
University women's coach and many time US Olympic coach gives his
distinct insight on the necessity of belief in order to succeed. We've
watched Richard work his coaching magic as a manager of an Olympic
team and as a Pan-Pacific assistant coach. This is a must-read chapter
for every coach and swimmer.
Jean Freeman, the women's coach at the University of Minnesota, is
one of the most successful coaches in the Big Ten Conference. She is
well known for her ability to make the swimming experience fun and
to instill a lifelong love of the sport in her swimmers. Her philosophy
and methods are the subject of chapter 2.
X
INTRODUCTION
Peter Daland, retired coach of the University of Southern California
and two-time US Olympic head coach, is one of the most respected
men in swimming. Dick Hannula knows this firsthand, as two of his
sons swam for Peter at USC. He is well qualified to speak on coaching
with integrity, and his work on the drug committee of the World Swim
Coaches' Association has contributed greatly to the control of perfor-
mance-enhancing drugs in swimming.
Part II includes five chapters about directing a program to its full po-
tential. In chapter 4 John Leonard, swim coach and executive director of
the American Swim Coaches' Association, discusses how to adapt your
coaching approach to meet the needs of the entire spectrum of swimmers.
He specifically addresses differences in age, ability, and gender as well
as the particular concerns of high school and college teams.
Jack Bauerle coaches at the University of Georgia and was a US Olym-
pic team coach in 2000. He provides many insights into administering
and marketing a successful program in chapter 5.
Chapter 6 deals with developing a successful team. Skip Kenney,
coach at Stanford University and US Olympic head coach in 1996, gets
to the very heart of this subject. Skip's college teams have won the NCAA
Championship title many times. His Pac 10 Championship meet titles
extend over 20 consecutive years, surpassing John Wooden's consecu-
tive Pac 10 Championship record in basketball at UCLA. This is one of
the most phenomenal records in collegiate swimming.
Chapter 7 is written by legendary Australian swim coach Bill Sweet-
enham. Having served many times as the Australian Olympic coach and
having spent the past several years as the National Youth Development
Coach in Australia, he is now taking over the position of National Team
Coach for Great Britain. Bill's experience and knowledge of swimming
is unsurpassed, and he covers the subject of maximizing swim talent
clearly and specifically in his chapter.
Creating an effective practice session and season is the subject of part
III, and the three related chapters cover this topic comprehensively. Jill
Sterkel covers long- and short-range planning in chapter 8. As a former
world-record holder, four-time Olympic swimmer, and the current
women's coach at the University of Texas, Jill brings great experience
to her chapter.
In chapter 9, Dr. Bruce Mason discusses putting science—biomechan-
ics, physiotherapy, altitude training, and more—into practice. He is one
of the most qualified swimming biomechanists in the world and serves
the Australian Institute of Sport, the Australian Olympic team, and (as
a director) the International Society of Biomechanics in Sports.
xi
INTRODUCTION
Deryk Snelling writes on the art of coaching in chapter 10. He has
coached successfully internationally for decades. Dick first knew Deryk
as the coach of the Vancouver Canadian Dolphins; Deryk had then, as
he does now, an uncanny ability to get more out of his swimmers than
their obvious talent might indicate. His insights on the art of coaching
are highly valued.
Part IV concentrates on teaching stroke technique, including starts,
turns, and finishes. Each chapter in this section is written by coaches
who have brought something unique and special to the teaching of
technique. Rick Demont, former world-record holder in the 400 meter
and 1,500-meter freestyle, covers two different freestyle techniques in
chapter 11.
Dick Hannula discusses the finer points of backstroke technique in
chapter 12. Dick focuses on the 3 R's of backstroke and looks closely at
the unique style of Lenny Krayzelburg.
Pablo Morales is a former world-record holder and gold medalist in
the 100-meter butterfly who now coaches at San Jose State. He has writ-
ten clearly and with great feeling about sharpening technique for better
butterfly in chapter 13.
Dave Salo has had phenomenal success with breaststrokers as a club
coach and was an assistant coach for the United States at the Sydney
Olympics. His greatest breaststroke success thus far has been Amanda
Beard's performance at the Atlanta Olympics. At the Northwest Swim
Coaches' Clinic a few years ago Dave gave an exceptionally comprehen-
sive and understandable presentation on breaststroke technique. His
chapter 14 covers the same topic in similar fashion.
John Trembley has continued the tradition of great racing starts and
turns that the University of Tennessee is known for. He is unquestionably
the best clinic speaker and writer on the technical aspects of starts and
turns in swimming today. He was a natural choice to write chapter 15
on starts, turns, and finishes.
The final section, part V, covers the training necessary to achieve
optimal performance. The list of coach-contributors is once again most
impressive in terms of the success they've had with their swimmers.
Mike Bottom, who swam at USC and now coaches with Nort Thornton
at the University of California at Berkeley, specializes in sprint training
(chapter 16). Mike's training program for sprinters is highly specific and
very unique. His unconventional program has been very successful,
producing NCAA champions and three of the five fastest swimmers in
the world in 2000—including the two 50-meter freestyle gold medalists
in Sydney, Gary Hall Jr. and Anthony Ervin.
xii
INTRODUCTION
Doug Frost coaches the great Ian Thorpe of Australia. In chapter 17,
on middle-distance training, Doug details his philosophy and training
methods. We are very proud to have him as one of the contributors to
this book.
Dick Jochums is an innovator as well as a practical coach who has
always believed in specificity over yardage. His swimmers have achieved
great success, including Olympic gold. He shares his philosophy on
freestyle distance training in chapter 18.
Eddie Reese, who wrote chapter 19 on backstroke and butterfly sprint
training, is one of the great communicators in coaching. Eddie has that
rare ability to make a difference. A great storyteller and a great leader,
he continues to stay at or near the top of the collegiate championship
scene.
Bill Rose has coached in both Canada and the United States, and is
presently coaching the Mission Viejo Swim Club. Author of chapter
20 on backstroke and butterfly 200-meter training, he has coached top-
ranked back and butterfly swimmers in the 200 event for many years. He
continues to be one of the more successful elite coaches in the United
States today.
Jon Urbanchek is known for his down-to-earth style and his ability to
identify with his swimmers. His program at the University of Michigan is
responsible for a steady stream of Olympic champions, including world-
record holder Mike Barrowman in the 200-meter breaststroke. While
he writes about breaststroke training in chapter 21, he could have also
written on the 200 butterfly, the event his athlete Tom Malchow won in
Sydney; the 400 IM, the event in which Tom Dolan, a former University
of Michigan swimmer, has twice been Olympic champion; or distance
freestyle, in which another of his athletes, Chris Thompson, won the
bronze medal in the 1,500 meters at Sydney. We are very pleased that Jon
has provided this excellent chapter on training for the breaststroke.
Dick Shoulberg is a walking bundle of enthusiasm. He loves swim-
ming and the swimmers who are willing to do the work to be successful.
After 31 years at the Germantown Academy, Dick continues to turn out
Olympians. In chapter 22, he writes about individual medley training, a
topic with which he is quite familiar. His successes in the IM include a
world-record holder as well as several Olympians and medal winners.
David Marsh has been quite successful at Auburn University, having
won national championship titles in both men's and women's swim-
ming. He served as an assistant coach for the 2000 US Olympic team.
His Auburn relay teams have been awesome, and he was a great choice
for chapter 23 on relay training.
xiii
INTRODUCTION
One of the great innovators in swimming, Randy Reese has always
been willing to try new approaches. His unique ideas of developing
strength and power while in the water have been most successful. When
Randy speaks, as he does in chapter 24 on power training, smart coaches
listen.
Our final chapter (25) on preparing to excel in competitions is written
by legendary coach Don Gambril. Don coached five US Olympic teams
and produced world-record holders almost from the start of his career.
He is one of the most successful swimming coaches ever; he knows what
it takes to excel and can talk effectively and convincingly to swimmers.
As a coach, he could tell swimmers what the world record was, what it
would take to break that record, and that he believed that the swimmer
could do it. We think you'll find that Don closes this book on a positive,
inspiring note.
As we put this material together, we found it fascinating reading and
could not wait to use the information in our coaching. We believe this
is exactly the way you will feel when you delve into the chapters we
have collected here. Whether you are actively coaching or swimming,
or are simply taken with the sport of swimming, you have many hours
of interesting reading ahead. We urge coaches and swimmers to read
The Swim Coaching Bible and then to keep it handy for future reference
and motivation.
xiv
PART
I
Establishing
Priorities and
Principles
CHAPTER ONE
Believing in
Belief
Richard Quick
Quick
How could Dara Torres—at age 33 and having been out of swimming for
seven years—return to the sport in 2000 after only 14 months of train-
ing and swim significantly faster than ever before in each of her events,
setting two American records and taking five Olympic medals (two of
them gold on world-record relays)?
How could American 200-meter butterflyer Misty Hyman drop from
2:09.2 (her lifetime best) at the 2000 Olympic trials to 2:05.88 just 30
days later to beat world-record holder and defending Olympic cham-
pion Susie O'Neill, breaking O'Neill's six-year winning streak in the
200 butterfly?
How do several women, and thousands of men and boys, now swim
the 200-meter freestyle faster than Don Schollander ever did? Recog-
nized as one of the most talented swimmers ever to put on a Speedo,
Don was the first man to break 2:00 in the 200-meter freestyle. He had a
perfect stroke and swam in the best swimming environment possible in
the 1960s, the Santa Clara Swim Club. He was coached by the greatest
coach of all time, George Haines, who coached more Olympians, more
gold medalists, and more world-record holders than any coach in his-
tory. How is it that today, swimming in less than perfect environments,
guided by coaches less proficient than Haines, so many swimmers can
achieve faster times than Don Schollander did?
The common denominator among Dara Torres, Misty Hyman, and all
the swimmers who swim faster than Don Schollander is a deep core be-
lief that they can accomplish what at one time appeared to most people
to be impossible.
Belief Makes the Extraordinary Ordinary
Have you ever noticed that once something extraordinary is accom-
plished it becomes more ordinary? Why is that? When one human
being, believing that he or she will be successful, prepares to achieve
and then accomplishes the extraordinary, it seems to give the rest of us
permission to believe we might be able to accomplish (or surpass) the
same goal. The feat becomes feasible, attainable, and therefore more
ordinary. Our belief system is expanded beyond the previous limits we
may have placed on it.
Thirteen months before Misty Hyman's extraordinary upset of Susie
O'Neill in the 2000 Olympic 200-meter butterfly event, Misty finished
a very disappointing third in the 200 fly at the Pan-Pacific Champion-
ships in the Olympic pool in Sydney. Susie O'Neill dominated that
race, nearly breaking Mary T. Meagher's long-standing world record,
4
Believing in Belief
and beating Misty by at least four seconds. Misty was discouraged and
began to doubt that she had what it takes to be successful.
I met Misty in the long hallway on the way to the warm-down pool.
(This is the same place I would meet her to celebrate her great Olympic
victory 13 months later.) I put my arm around her, and as we walked to
the warm-down pool I told her she was the only swimmer in the world
who could beat Susie in the 200 fly in the Olympic Games. I said that al-
though it might seem impossible after such a poor performance I believed
she could win the Olympic gold medal in 2000. Then I told Misty that it
didn't matter what I believed she could do if she did not believe she could
do it. At that moment Misty began to believe. She began to believe that if
she swam the ideal race at the ideal time, she'd have a chance.
Over the next 12 months as she prepared for the Olympic trials, did
doubts ever creep in? Absolutely, but she knew that her belief in her
ability and in the possibility of putting together the ideal race at the ideal
time could lead to the extraordinary. Did she have setbacks? Absolutely;
she was beaten in the NCAA Championships in the 200 fly, she suffered
continuously from allergies that resulted in a chronic lack of energy, and
she dealt with a few illnesses that year. But Misty's belief system kept
giving her hope. Believe in belief. Belief in yourself and in your goals
is the basis for extraordinary performance.
Belief Brings Commitment
Belief in yourself and in your goals facilitates the attitude that you will
do whatever it takes. Belief allows you to commit to your goal as if you
cannot fail. Dara Torres had a belief that she could make the Olympic
team as an alternate on the 400 freestyle relay when she called me to ask
if I would be willing to coach her. My first question to her was, “Will you
do whatever it takes to be successful?” Her answer was yes. From that
moment on, Dara's belief in herself and in her goals encouraged her to
pack three years of training into 13 months. Her training included up to
eight hours a day of water training, weight training, spinning, running,
Tae Bo, resistive stretching, dryland exercises, cutting edge nutrition
and supplementation, deep-tissue massage, and becoming familiar with
“awareness thinking.” Dara's belief system allowed her to train and to
commit to her goals as if she could not fail.
Believe in belief. Belief in yourself and in your goals allows you to set
new goals as you approach or accomplish your previous goals. At first
Dara believed that she could only make the relay; as she improved she
began to believe that she could make it in an individual event, then in
5
Believing in Belief
more than one individual event. Eventually she began to believe that she
could win an individual Olympic medal. Finally she came to believe that
she could win an individual gold medal. Dara's growing belief in herself
led to five medals in the 2000 Olympic Games, more than any other swim-
mer. She won three bronze medals, the first individual Olympic medals
in her storied, four-time U.S. Olympic team member career. Believe in
yourself and in your goals; grow and act as if you cannot fail.
True goals are products of an individual's belief system. A true goal
can only exist if an individual believes it is possible. A true goal is
something that you absolutely believe you can and will accomplish. It
is more than something you write down, something you hope you can
reach, or something a coach or a parent wants you to do. A true goal is
something you know you will accomplish.
A true goal is so much a part of your core belief system that it affects
every activity you do that is even remotely related to that goal. It keeps
you from doing anything that might hinder your success. It allows you
to act, to train, and to compete as if you cannot fail. Your belief system
cannot conceive of failure; it will not let you fall short of your goal. A
true goal is not just a wish or a hope. A true goal will be accomplished.
Believe in belief.
Most people sell themselves short. Most people need permission to
accomplish something. Most of the swimmers who now swim faster
than Don Schollander swam in the 1960s are not considered the most
talented swimmers around, and most are not as well trained or as well
coached as Don was. Most of these swimmers would not have been able
to swim that fast in the 1960s even if they'd had the expert coaching and
the modern, scientific training available today. Why? They would not
have believed it was possible. Until Don Schollander broke the barrier,
no one thought a human could swim that fast.
Belief Gives Permission Beyond Limits
Most of us have to wait for someone else to prove to us that something
can be accomplished. We need permission. The greatest athletes, and
for that matter, the greatest innovators in any field, say, "This will surely
be done in the future; why can't I be the one to do it now?” They do
not need permission to accomplish feats that others think are unbeliev-
able or impossible. Their belief systems are so strong that what seems
extraordinary to most people seems attainable to them.
By far, the most important thing to believe in is yourself. True belief
in yourself allows you to act as if you cannot fail. However, sometimes
6
Believing in Belief
circumstances beyond your control will prevent you from accomplishing
your goals, no matter how much you believe in them. This is disappoint-
ing, but not devastating. True belief in yourself means that your self-worth
is not dependent upon your accomplishments or your possessions.
Jenny Thompson is one of the greatest swimmers in the world. She
broke the world record in the 100-meter freestyle in 1992 and in the
100-meter butterfly in 1999. Throughout her career, she has won many
world championships, national championships, and Olympic medals,
including eight gold medals in relays. In fact, Jenny has more gold med-
als than any other female swimmer in history, but none of her golds are
in individual events. Jenny's goal was to win an individual gold medal
in her final Olympic Games appearance in Sydney. She did not accom-
plish that goal. Certainly she was disappointed, but her belief in herself
does not allow her to measure herself by whether or not she received an
individual gold medal in the Olympic Games. While Jenny celebrates
her accomplishments in swimming, her many awards, her degree from
Stanford, and her acceptance to Columbia University Medical School,
her self-worth is not measured by those things either. Jenny has a deeply
rooted belief in herself as a human being that transcends what she has
or has not done and what she does or does not have.
Belief in yourself and in the possibility of success is the most important
requirement for living an extraordinary life. Believe in belief. Believe
in yourself and the best of the world will come to you and like Dara,
Misty, and Jenny, you will be prepared to receive it. Don't sell yourself
short. You do not require permission to do the extraordinary.
Summary
• Extraordinary swimmers have a core belief that they can accomplish
what others believe to be impossible.
• Belief will carry you through difficulties and setbacks.
• Belief allows you to commit to your goals.
• Act as if you cannot fail.
7
CHAPTER TWO
Putting Fun Into
the Swimming
Experience
Jean Freeman
Freeman
Remember why you joined your first swim team? Most likely you en-
joyed being in the water and thought swimming was a fun way to be
with friends. I began swimming because the kids in my neighborhood
were swimmers and said it was fun. I joined my first team at age eight
and have been involved with competitive swimming ever since—for
over 40 years. I am still enjoying the sport, possibly more now than ever.
Many things have made the sport fun for me. I hope that as I share some
of my ideas on swimming you will discover some ways to add fun and
enthusiasm for the sport to your coaching and your program.
As I look back on what led me to become a swim coach, I realize that
I have wanted to teach ever since I was a young child. Teaching and
coaching have much in common; in many ways coaches are teachers,
too. In the course of my development as a coach, I have watched teachers
interact with their classes and have tried to understand how they achieve
rapport with their students. I have found that the best teacher-student
relationships come from an understanding based on trust and respect,
an understanding that takes time and consistency to build. The same
is true of coach-athlete relationships. The best coaches nurture small
successes every day and celebrate them along the way. This positive
reinforcement goes a long way toward building trust and respect; other
swimmers on the team notice that attention and encouragement are given
to those who strive to improve and to do well. Success may be built on
good attendance, learning key technique or competition concepts from
a disappointment, making a new friend, or swimming faster. Coaches
must be aware of the physical, mental, and emotional development level
of each age group they work with, as well as any pertinent economic
factors affecting their swimmers, so that they can tailor their approach
accordingly.
The swim coach is in a great situation. Most people who join teams
expect the coach to be in charge. They expect the coach to help them
become better swimmers. The key is to figure out how to get swimmers
from where they are to the next level of development—in technique,
conditioning, discipline, social skills—as well as teaching them appro-
priate competitive attitudes, how to deal with failures, how to strive for
success, and how to celebrate. I am thankful for my education major in
college because of what it taught me about planning. It was drilled into
me that each session should have a clear purpose and a clear plan. The
importance of continually evaluating and attempting to improve the
purpose and plan was also emphasized.
Another important concept that I learned through my training as an
educator is the necessity of establishing clear communication. Com-
10
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
munication among coaches, swimmers, and parents is critical for any
swim coach. Whether it is accomplished through monthly newsletters,
web pages, e-mail, or seasonal parent meetings, this communication not
only serves to keep everyone involved in the program informed, it also
helps coaches find out what their swimmers think is fun and what they
are passionate about. This kind of communication helps swimmers want
to come to practice rather than feeling they have to come to practice.
The following are some observations I have made that I apply to my
everyday coaching to ensure that my athletes have a fun, rewarding swim-
ming experience that allows them to continue to grow. These observations
relate to five basic responsibilities of a coach: building confidence, nur-
turing self-esteem, learning from competition, developing team leaders,
and planning for growth. Throughout this chapter I will expand on each
of these responsibilities and offer ways to approach them.
Make Swimming Fun!
Fun is necessary in all worthwhile activities.
Swimmers will stay in the sport if they continue to have fun.
Athletes perform their best when they are having fun.
Champions go fast because they are having fun.
Self-esteem and self-confidence are the two most important gifts we can nurture in oth-
ers and ourselves.
Welcome everyone to your program, wherever they are in life's journey.
Help your swimmers discover their passion and “go for it.”
Enthusiasm is important on a daily basis.
Maintain a positive attitude toward everything you do.
Forgiveness is necessary everyday.
Listen to swimmers, to staff, and to parents.
Fear of failure is natural. Learn from it and move on.
Celebrate success and give thanks for it along the way.
In order to reach your goals, you must begin with the end in mind.
Building Confidence