
--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
Be TARO)

aye

’ : feana® 5 ee ;

--- Page 2 Text ---
Breakthrough
Swimming
Cecil Colwin

--- Page 3 Text ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Colwin, Cecil.
Breakthrough swimming / Cecil M. Colwin.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7360-3777-2
1. Swimming--History. I. Title.
GV836.4 .C65 2002
797.2'1'09--dc21
2001039994
ISBN-10: 0-7360-3777-2
ISBN-13: 978-0-7360-3777-8
Copyright © 2002 by Cecil M. Colwin
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography, photocopying, and recording, and
in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without the written permission of the publisher.
Portions of this work are based on the book Swimming Into the 21st Century (1992), authored by Cecil M. Colwin and
published by Human Kinetics.
Developmental Editor: Cynthia McEntire; Assistant Editor: Scott Hawkins; Copyeditor: John Wentworth; Proof-
reader: Erin Cler; Indexer: Margaret Colwin; Permission Manager: Toni Harte; Graphic Designer: Nancy Rasmus;
Graphic Artist: Francine Hamerski; Photo Manager: Clark Brooks; Cover Designer: Robert Reuther; Photographer
(cover): Darren England/ALLSPORT; Photographers (interior): See credit notices on page ix; Art Manager: Craig
Newsom; Line Drawings: Cecil M. Colwin; figure 6.1 by Robert B. Colwin; Mac Illustrations: Interactive
Composition Corporation; Printer: Versa Press
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts can also
be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.HumanKinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics Australia: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076 57A Price Avenue
Champaign, IL 61825-5076 Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
800-747-4457 08 8372 0999
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com e-mail: liaw@hkaustralia.com
Canada: Human Kinetics New Zealand: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100 Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5 P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
800-465-7301 (in Canada only) North Shore City
e-mail: orders@hkcanada.com Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
Europe: Human Kinetics
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
107 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com

--- Page 4 Text ---
To Margaret, my wife and best friend these many years

--- Page 6 Text ---
Contents
Acknowledgments vii
Credits ix
Introduction xi
Part I Development of Stroke Fundamentals
Chapter 1 History of the Swimming Strokes 3
Chapter 2 Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 33
Chapter 3 Strokes, Starts, and Turns 49
Part II Movement Through Water
Chapter 4 Understanding Hydrodynamics 75
Chapter 5 Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 91
Chapter 6 Coaching the Feel of the Water 107
Part III Advances in Training
Chapter 7 Progression of Training Methods 123
Chapter 8 Principles of Modern Training 137
Chapter 9 Physiological Research and Applications 151
Chapter 10 Development of a Training Program 167
Part IV Past, Present, and Future of the Sport
Chapter 11 Evolution of Competitive Swimming 185
Chapter 12 Doping, Testing, and Modern Efforts to Gain an Edge 207
Chapter 13 Looking Back, Looking Ahead 217
Appendix A 400-Year Bibliography of the Historical
Development of the Swimming Strokes 229
References 233
Index 239
About the Author 247
v

--- Page 8 Text ---
Acknowledgments
This book was made possible through the di- (1490–1557) and even placed before me origi-
rect and indirect help of a great number of nal books by the two, both in pristine condition.
people. I wish to express my most sincere Dave Kelly of the Library of Congress in
thanks to all of them, although their number Washington, D.C. and Harry McKown, refer-
precludes my naming more than a few. ence associate of the North Carolina Collection,
Wilson Library, the University of North Caro-
Colleagues and Contributors lina at Chapel Hill, went to great lengths to
provide references on the early development of
Edward Atraghji, formerly of the Canadian American swimming. I express my deepest
Aeronautical Establishment, taught me about appreciation to both for their courtesy and
flow visualization and provided helpful sug- cooperation.
gestions on the treatment of the fluid dynamic Sasha Orivi of the State Library of Victoria in
content of this text. Melbourne conducted a search for, and pro-
Dr. David Pyne, Physiologist, Australian In- vided the first detailed account of, the first
stitute of Sport, contributed chapter 9 on the swimming race in Australia.
physiology of swimming training and shared Mardyth Hewitt of the National Library of
his unique experience in day-to-day practical Canada and Michelle Robichaud of the Library
work with some of the world’s greatest swim- of Parliament provided expertise in locating
mers. William Byrd’s diary.
William “Buck” Dawson wrote on the his- Robert Schleihauf granted permission to pre-
tory of American swimming in chapter 11. pare and publish drawings adapted from illus-
Nort Thornton, head swimming coach of the trations in “Swimming Propulsion: A Hydro-
University of California at Berkeley, gave per- dynamic Analysis” (1977).
mission to use material from his excellent ar- Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York,
ticle, “A Few Thoughts on Training,” from the gave permission to use the extract from 1st
ASCA magazine. century Roman poet, Manilius, as contained in
Thomas Kirk Cureton gave permission to Sport in Greece and Rome.
use materials from chapter 4 of How to Teach Dr. Kare I. Birkeland and Dr. Peter Hem-
Swimming and Diving (1934), published by As- mersbach, both of the Hormone Laboratory,
sociation Press, New York, and to use the chap- Aker Hospital, Oslo, Norway, and the publish-
ter footnotes as a framework in compiling my ers of Sports Medicine, Adle International, gave
chronological bibliography of the history of the permission to use information from their ar-
swimming strokes. ticle “The Future of Doping Control in Ath-
letes.”
Resource Specialists Dr. Brent Rushall gave permission to reprint
the list of positive drug tests by swimmer by
I am particularly grateful to those who guided country as it appeared in Swimming’s Hall of
me to valuable sources of information that I Shame published by Sports Science Associates.
otherwise would have missed. Karin Helmstaedt gave permission to re-
Liana Van der Bellen, chief of the Rare Books print from her coverage of the German drug
Division, National Library of Canada, gave me trials as reported in Swimnews, July 2000, and
invaluable assistance in researching the works also to Swimnews for permission to reprint this
of Thevenot (1620–1692) and Olaus Magnus article.
vii

--- Page 9 Text ---
viii Acknowledgments
Professor Steven Vogel gave permission to I am grateful to Colin Trewavas, Municipal
reprint from his book Cat’s Paws and Catapults. Research and Merseyside Records Office,
John Leonard, executive director of the Liverpool, England, for his courtesy and kind-
American Swimming Coaches Association, ness in providing access to records and photo-
gave permission to adapt from his articles on graphs of milestones in the history of
coaching certification and his report on the Liverpool’s bath and washhouses, which were
FINA Conference on Doping Control, Hong among the first pools built in England.
Kong, March 2000. Whatever else a book may be, it is ulti-
Betty Armbruster gave permission to reprint mately an offering to its potential readers, and
from the work of her late father, David A. it must be presented to them in a form that is
Armbruster, Competitive Swimming and Diving accessible and attractive. A vast symbolic dis-
(1942), four sets of sequence drawings (namely tance often separates the head of an author
of the freestyle stroke, backstroke, breaststroke- from the eyes of a reader, and those who seek
butterfly, and butterfly-breaststroke). to bridge that gulf, or at least to narrow it, bear
Dr. Phillip Whitten, editor in chief of Sports a weighty responsibility. It can only succeed
Publications, Inc., gave permission to reprint in the hands of men and women who revere
from “A Century of Change,” an article written books and their making. Of these there are
by the author that originally appeared in Swim- greater and lesser, which is why an author
ming World, December 1999, as well as the published under the imprimatur and imprint
ranking lists of the top male and female swim- of Human Kinetics must never forget his good
mers of the 20th century. fortune. In this regard, I express my deep
N. J. Thierry, editor and publisher of appreciation to my publisher, Rainer Mar-
Swimnews magazine and secretary of the Inter- tens; acquisitions editor, Ted Miller; and de-
national Swimming Statisticians’ Association, velopmental editor, Cynthia McEntire, whose
gave general permission to use extracts from advice and expertise were invaluable. I also
Swimnews and prepared the graphs of progres- appreciate very much the advice of art direc-
sion of long-course and short-course world tor Craig Newsom and the expert efforts of
records on pages 195 and 196. sales director Charles Walters and marketing
Fred Wilt, Olympic runner, Sullivan Award manager Kelley Halliburton. Thanks are ex-
winner, and acknowledged authority on track tended to assistant editor Scott Hawkins who
training, kindly reviewed the information about ensured the book’s smooth progress through
the influence of track training on swimming the final production stages.
and checked it for accuracy. Last, but by no means least, I owe a special
Gilmore Reproductions of 61 Queen Street, debt of gratitude to my wife, Margaret, for her
Ottawa, provided photocopying services and hard work and assistance in preparing the final
the use of advanced technologies in making draft of this book. Her encouragement, wise
copies of text and artwork. Their help and counsel, patience, and untiring efforts eased
kindness in the preparation of three books over the task.
the years have been invaluable.

--- Page 10 Text ---
Credits
Photos Figures
Photo of Janet Evans on page 3 © Rob Tringali Jr./ Figure 9.1 Reprinted, by permission, from B.E. Counsil-
SportsChrome USA. man and J.E. Counsilman, 1991, “The residual effects
Photo of Lenny Krayzelburg on page 33 © Bongarts/ of training” Journal of Swimming Research 7:5-12.
SportsChrome USA. Figure 10.2 from “Constructing workouts with energy
system considerations” by E.W. Maglischo in American
Photo of Krisztina Egerszegi on page 49 © Bongarts/
Swimming Coaches Association World Clinic Yearbook
SportsChrome USA.
1985 (62) by T. Welsh (ed.), 1985, Fort Lauderdale, FL:
Photo of Kristy Kowal on page 75 © Michael Zito/
American Swimming Coaches Association. Reprinted
SportsChrome USA.
by permission of American Swimming Coaches Asso-
Photo of Lenny Krayzelburg on page 91 © Michael ciation and E.W. Maglischo.
Zito/SportsChrome USA.
Figure 10.3 Reprinted, by permission, from T.O. Bompa,
Photo of Jenny Thompson on page 107 © Rob Tringali 1985, Theory and methodology of training (Dubuque, IA:
Jr./SportsChrome USA. Kendall/Hunt).
Photo of Ashley Chandler on page 123 © Rob Tringali Figure 10.4 Reprinted, by permission, from T.O. Bompa,
Jr./SportsChrome USA. 1985, Theory and methodology of training (Dubuque, IA:
Photo of Yana Klochkova on page 137 © Marco Chiesa. Kendall/Hunt).
Photo of Amy Van Dyken on page 151 © Rob Tringali
Jr./SportsChrome USA. Tables
Photo on page 156 © Cecil Colwin.
Table 10.1 Reprinted, by permission, from J.E. Counsilman,
Photo of Alexander Popov on page 167 © Bongarts/
1975, “Hypoxic and other methods of training evalu-
SportsChrome USA.
ated” Swimming Technique 12(1).
Photo of Mark Spitz on page 185 © Gjuljano
Table 10.2 Reprinted, by permission, from J.E. Counsilman,
Bevilacqua/SportsChrome USA.
1975, “Hypoxic and other methods of training evalu-
Photo on page 207 © Tony Demin/International Stock. ated” Swimming Technique 12(1).
Photo of Ian Thorpe on page 217 © Marco Chiesa. Table 10.3 Adapted, by permission, from T. Absaliamov,
1984, “Controlling the training of top level swimmers”
in How to develop Olympic level swimmers edited by J.L.
Cramer (Finland: International Sports Media) and
adapted, by permission, from D.B. Pyne and R.D.
Telford, 1988, “Classification of training sessions” Ex-
cel 5(2).
ix

--- Page 12 Text ---
Introduction
This book is about the evolution of competi- tists suddenly became unemployed. It is un-
tive swimming in all its major disciplines, known to what extent they became part of the
from its birth in early 19th-century England to new Germany, although some of their coaches
the present era. found employment in other parts of the world.
Almost every era of competitive swimming What they contributed to swimming in other
brought new ideas and breakthrough swim- countries is unknown, but at least one of their
mers, who with scant regard for the record number spent some time in China, conducting
books, reached undreamed of heights. But clinics in that country. The appearance of
never have there been such spectacular break- performance-enhancing drugs in Chinese
throughs as those seen at the 2000 Sydney swimming seemed to have coincided with the
Olympic Games and the 2001 World Champion- fall of the East German regime.
ships in Fukuoka. It is rare that one is given the chance to tackle
Breakthrough Swimming focusses on the meth- a job a second time, and this carefully researched
ods and the innovative thinking behind the new edition is but a modest attempt to bring
success of these modern swimming giants who past, present, and future into unison. However,
have literally destroyed seemingly unassail- we should not view the evolution of competi-
able marks, and brought the sport to a new high tive swimming as a continuing linear process
level of performance. because the pioneers of the sport proceeded
Portions of this book are based on my earlier down many dead ends and also frequently
work, Swimming Into the 21st Century which failed to develop potentially valuable ideas.
was published in 1992, after six years of prepa- The gold was there but often thrown away to be
ration, but I could not have foreseen a need so retrieved by others years later.
soon for an expanded and almost completely The process of change consisted of long peri-
re-written edition. The tumultuous events of ods of normal development in which there were
the last decade of the 20th century dictated few deviations from the paradigms of existing
otherwise. Without doubt, no other period in ideas. Then would follow a shorter period of
the history of swimming has presented greater pronounced change, as rival ideas fought to
challenge or change. take the place of a dominant framework that
The so-called velvet revolutions of the late was beginning to decay through lack of progress.
1980s that overturned Communism and even- The first part of the book introduces the
tually the Soviet Empire had an enormous im- reader to the ingenuity of the great coach-
pact on every aspect of modern life, including educators and how their restless inventiveness
sport. The breakup of the Soviet Union saw and persistence gradually built the technical
several new independent states join the ranks foundations of a great sport. The evolution of
of FINA (the international swimming federa- the swimming strokes is described and illus-
tion), with a resultant increase in the number of trated in detail, from the start of formal compe-
swimmers competing in major international tition in the early 1830s through the advanced
meets such as the Olympics and the World techniques of today.
Championships. The 19th century saw experiments with dif-
With the reunification of Germany on Octo- ferent versions of the sidestroke, followed later
ber 2, 1990, literally thousands of East German by the trudgen stroke. Then, as if to celebrate
sport administrators, coaches, and sport scien- the start of the 20th century, came an entirely
xi

--- Page 13 Text ---
xii Introduction
new way of swimming, the surprisingly fast the human body could tolerate. The watch-
crawl stroke. But it took most of the 20th cen- word was “train but do not strain!”
tury for the crawl stroke to be improved and The chapters on training describe how, in the
refined until it became the beautiful, smooth- 1950s, Yale and U.S. Olympic coach Robert
flowing action exhibited by Pieter van den Kiphuth introduced a method called wind-
Hoogenband, Ian Thorpe, Alexander Popov, sprints, which consisted of 50-meter sprints
and Susie O’Neill at the 2000 Sydney Olympic interspersed with one-minute rest periods. Later
Games, where they brought the understanding interval training methods used on the running
of crawl-stroke swimming into a new millenium track were successfully adapted to swimming
and a new paradigm. by the Australians who combined them with
Over the years, during all the experiment- Kiphuth’s earlier model. Not surprisingly, they
ing with new stroke mechanics, the question went on to win the majority of the swimming
was often asked, “But what happens to the medals in the 1956 Olympics. In the 1960s, Dr.
water when a swimmer exerts effort against James Counsilman developed the first clear
it?” The answer is that we don’t exactly know, outline of how different work-to-rest ratios
but it seems obvious that if swimming and used in swimming training produced specific
swimmers are to continue to improve we will physiological effects. As a direct result of his
need to become far more adept at manipulat- emphasis on empirical research and useful ap-
ing the reacting flow with ever increasing plication, this era saw one of the greatest for-
efficiency. Then we ask other questions: How ward surges in swimming history.
much effort should a swimmer exert against Included in the discussion on training meth-
the water? Do we apply more effort than nec- ods is a brilliant contributing chapter by Dr.
essary? Here again, we don’t rightly know. David Pyne, physiologist to the Australian In-
Suffice it to say that the text breaks new ground stitute of Sport and to the successful Australian
in describing how by studying the flow reac- National Swimming Team. Dr. Pyne covers the
tions created by the swimming stroke, certain physiology of modern swimming training and
fluid dynamic principles can be used to un- the preparation of swimming teams for top-
derstand, analyze, and improve stroke me- flight international competition. In this state-
chanics. of-the-art presentation, Dr. Pyne presents in-
The discussion on the evolution of training sightful views on future directions for the
methods commences with the methods used successful application of scientific training.
by the 19th-century pioneers then progresses The last part of this book traces the history of
through the 20th century to the state-of-the-art competitive swimming, examines the current
scientific training methods used by the world’s problems facing the sport, and looks ahead to
best swimmers in preparing for the 2000 Olym- future innovations. The colorful story of the
pic Games. growth of organized competitive swimming is
The doughty champions of Victorian En- covered in depth. This chapter spans the entire
gland pursued training methods characterized panorama of competitive swimming, from its
by ignorance and superstition. The old style start in 1837 as a professional sport to its reign
regimen of reducing a man to a living skeleton as an amateur sport for the next 100 years and
by physicking, purgings, sweatings, and then its insidious return to professionalism in
bleedings, to build him up afresh was stupid as the late 20th century. The text describes the
well as cruel. growth of international swimming and the birth
At the beginning of the 20th century, track of FINA as the international governing body of
athletes were already experimenting with in- swimming, a development largely brought
terval training, but this form of training wasn’t about by prominent British officials who based
adapted to competitive swimming until 50 years the FINA constitution on that of the Amateur
later in the mid-1950s. Before this time, swim- Swimming Association of Great Britain.
mers were too preoccupied with perfecting The development of the great Australian tra-
techniques and had no idea of how much stress dition in swimming is covered in depth, begin-

--- Page 14 Text ---
Introduction xiii
ning with the construction of the first swim- ent in hard work and honest effort, not to
ming pool in the 1870s and continuing to the mention the thrill and challenge of fair compe-
reorganization of their national swimming pro- tition. As swimming moves into the new mil-
gram in the late 20th century, which led to the lennium, it is clear to keen observers that the
notable successes of Australian swimmers at sport is in danger of losing its connection to
the Sydney Olympics. Following the Austra- the traditions and values on which it was built.
lians is an account of the outstanding record Unfortunately, people who abhor these trends
and great contribution to world swimming by often feel powerless, inadequate, and drained
the United States, the giant of world swimming in the face of the attendant subterfuge and
in terms of technical knowledge, coaching ex- dissimulation.
perience, excellence, and a long roster of bril- In many countries, faceless bureaucratic sys-
liant Olympic champions that continued to in- tems control all levels of sport, and politics has
crease at the Sydney Olympics. The growth of become almost a vocation within their national
the national program concept and the sudden offices, a job for professional administrators
and remarkable rise to supremacy by the Japa- and pragmatists rather than the idealists and
nese swimmers in the 1930s is also covered. innovators of the past. The centralization of
The chapter on the doping plague in swim- power in national headquarters and national
ming discusses the so-called success of the sport centers, to a large extent, leads to a denial
former state-sponsored East German program, of individuality.
which was based on the illegal administration Swimming needs enlightened and coura-
of performance-enhancing drugs to athletes geous leadership to help meet these internal
under the charge of state officials, and the transformations. Instead, the love of power
subsequent trials of the officials involved. There and personal prestige has become a preoccupa-
is also a detailed account of the current doping tion for many, and the old boys’ network re-
problem in Chinese swimming, whose athletes mains a constituent part of the so-called Olym-
have tested positive far more frequently than pic family.
those of other countries. In the past 30 years, the There exists also the anomaly of an osten-
scourge of doping has gradually reached a sible amateur body conducting a professional
crisis point where the survival of competitive sport. Many are convinced of the need for a
swimming now lies in the balance. The most revised FINA constitution that would reflect
astute minds of our sport, almost without ex- the changed nature of the sport, as well as
ception, agree on this point. address the need for a more equitable voting
The last 10 years have seen the abandonment system that recognizes the contribution of
of the once holy grail of amateurism and the FINA’s founding nations and the generations
growing influence of large corporate sponsors, of outstanding coaches whose knowledge and
warmly welcomed by officialdom as partners experience have led to so much progress.
in the sport. The availability of prize money By giving special attention to the connective
and large endorsement fees tempt the use of tissue that binds each phase of the sport’s de-
performance-enhancing drugs, a problem that velopment, it may still be possible to take the
shows no sign of diminishing, despite attempts best from the past and add it to the present to
to fight it. make a better future. With renewed pride in the
With these changes has come a growing traditions of our sport, we may yet be able to
disregard, in some quarters, for the integrity tackle the future with confidence, purpose, and
of the sport and the educational values inher- resolve.

--- Page 16 Text ---
PART I
Development
of Stroke
Fundamentals

--- Page 18 Text ---
Chapter 1
History of the
Swimming Strokes
From the sparse descriptions on
record, early attempts at swimming
probably consisted of random arm
and leg movements with no spe-
cific techniques; otherwise, we
know little of the early history of
human swimming. Before orga-
nized competitive swimming
started in England, about 170 years
ago, there was little need to develop
methods beyond those that came
naturally to each individual.
The technical development of
swimming didn’t start until the mid-
19th century with the building of
swimming pools, the invention of
the stopwatch, and the beginning
of competitive swimming as a for-
mal sport.
The first competitive swimmers
were more intent on developing
good style rather than speed. Grace-
ful and elegant movements, with a
minimum of splashing, were con-
sidered the hallmarks of style by
the early exponents of the sport.
This was evident in 1844, when
English swimmers saw the swim-
ming methods of visiting North
American Indians in London. Be-
cause the Indians’ more advanced
overarm strokes were characterized
by wild splashing, their methods
were dismissed by the English as
unworthy of imitating.
3

--- Page 19 Text ---
4 Breakthrough Swimming
Neither did the English know that across the The first human swimmers most likely lived
broad expanses of the Pacific Ocean, the inhabit- by the sea or near warm rivers. Five thousand
ants of Polynesia and Melanesia had been swim- years ago humans learned to divert rivers such
ming with overarm strokes for more than a thou- as the Nile, the Euphrates, and the Indus, and
sand years. And along the coasts of South it’s likely that people living in these regions
America, Africa, and India, versions of the were at home in the water and swam fre-
trudgen stroke, another technique more advanced quently.
than those that existed in Western culture, had In the ancient world, diverting rivers to
been swum naturally for time immemorial. protect city–states led to swimming for mili-
tary purposes. Bas-reliefs housed in the Brit-
ish Museum show a river crossing by Assur-
Swimming in the Ancient World
nasir-pal, King of Assyria, and his army. When
Archaeologists know that humans developed these reliefs were found in the ruins of the
watercraft by 40,000 years ago, and so it’s rea- royal palace at Nimroud, students of swim-
sonable to assume people were swimming by ming techniques were excited because here, at
that time (Nemecek 2000). Many of these early last, they expected to find evidence of swim-
swimming activities seem to have been part of ming skills used in ancient times. Nineteenth-
religious rituals, recreation, or military maneu- century observers thought the reliefs showed
vers. soldiers swimming either sidestroke or the
trudgen stroke, while 20th-century observers
concluded that the Assyrians were actually
swimming the crawl stroke! And so, as al-
Swimming is one of the oldest arts, if we are to
ways, conclusions are drawn from one’s own
form an opinion from the fact that no trace of its vantage point.
origin, discovery, invention or improvement is The Baths of Caracalla and other baths built
by the Romans were enormous, but the swim-
to be found in any of the ancient writings.
ming tanks set aside for actual swimming were
—William Wilson (1883) very small. Those at Pompeii were only 13 feet
Descriptions in Ancient Literature
A nobleman of the Middle Kingdom of Egypt (2160–1780 B.C.) proudly recorded that his
children took swimming lessons with the king’s children, but no mention is made of skills
being taught (Cureton 1934).
A few references to swimming are found in the Old Testament, but they, too, do not
elaborate on swimming skills possessed by ancient peoples. The following Biblical excerpts
must rank among the earliest references to swimming: “. . . he that swimmeth, spreadeth
forth his hands to swim” Isaiah 25:11 (approximately 760 B.C.) and “. . . a river that I could
not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed
over . . .” Ezekiel 47:5. (Ezekiel was exiled to Babylon in 597 B.C.)
Cursory references to swimming have been made over the centuries by the Egyptians,
Israelites, Accadians, Sumerians, Babylonians, Hittites, Greeks, Romans, and other ancient
nations. Much has been made of the fact that the Romans were said to have considered no
branch of education more important than swimming, but like the other accounts from
ancient times, they left few descriptions of methods they used.
Translations from Greece and Rome speak of swimmers using alternating overarm
motions, and it’s possible that a type of overarm stroke may have been in common use long
ago. But this must remain pure conjecture because, as literate as the ancient Greeks and
Romans were, their writings give few descriptions of actual swimming techniques.

--- Page 20 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 5
However, one rare and beautifully written passage was left to us by Manilius, a 1st-
century Roman poet, who waxes lyrical on the pleasures of swimming:
For just as the dolphin glides through the water on swift fins,
now rising above the surface and now sinking to the depths,
and piles up waves and sends them off in circles, just so will
each person born under the sign of the Dolphin fly through
the waves, raising one arm and then the other in slow arcs.
(Marcus Manilius (circa 14 A.D.), from Astronomica, an unfinished poem on
astronomy and astrology.)
One can envision the scene 2,000 years ago: a balmy day, a buoyant sea, and a skilled
swimmer performing, yes, a type of overarm stroke. Across the centuries, a fellow enthusiast
conveys with words his love of the water and his fascination with swimming propulsion. His
reference to dolphin swimming was prophetic in the extreme, as imitating the dolphin action
is the most successful adaptation humans have made from nature to their own swimming
propulsion. And he must have had sharp eyes, for he describes not only technique but even
the reacting vortex flows in the water, an unusual observation even today.
wide, and Cicero complained that he needed a water (Counsilman 1968). As the stroke tech-
wider pool to avoid hurting his hands against nique developed, so did the drills used by
the wall. However, the baths of Mohenjo-Dario swimmers, although some of these drills were
in the Indus valley (in today’s West Pakistan) strange (figure 1.1). Debate followed on whether
were somewhat larger. They measured 39 feet using the soles of the feet in the frog kick
long and 23 feet wide and were said to have yielded more propulsion than spreading the
been the birthplace of a form of synchronized legs and then straightening them before clos-
swimming that served a religious function ing in a tight wedge, such as the kick shown in
(Cottrell 1960). figure 1.2 (Thomas 1904).
In the Middle Ages, swimming became un-
popular throughout Europe because people
believed water helped spread plague and other
common epidemics. When people did swim,
they preferred a form of breaststroke that kept
their faces out of the water. Not until the second
half of the 19th century was prejudice against
swimming largely overcome.
Swimming in the Western World
Figure 1.1 In the 19th century, breaststroke drills
were weird and wonderful. From Dalton 1899.
In 16th- and 17th-century Europe, the breast-
stroke was performed with the head held high
and completely out of the water (Thevenot Such discussions on the most efficient use of
1699). Instead of using a frog kick, propulsion the legs in the breaststroke kick marked the
was applied with the insteps and not the soles beginning of technical thinking and a growing
of the feet (Muths 1798). interest in improving propulsion. Understand-
Early in the 19th century, breaststroke swim- ing the positive effect that could be achieved by
mers adopted a frog kick in which the ankles a slight change of technique was (and is) sig-
were dorsi-flexed and propulsion developed nificant; this ability later was to prove an im-
by pressing the soles of the feet against the portant characteristic of a capable coach.

--- Page 21 Text ---
6 Breakthrough Swimming
Figure 1.2 The wedge kick style of breaststroke used in the 19th century. From Wilson 1883.
Charles Steedman (1867) was probably the takes to a great extent account for the too often
first to caution against drawing the knees unsuccessful efforts made by those who wish to
forward under the body when swimming teach themselves.” Wilson said that the major
breaststroke (figure 1.3). He said that this nega- propulsion should be obtained from the leg kick
tive or retarding action caused resistance and because it is “easier to push the body forward
retarded the progress of the swimmer. He said than to pull it through or along. The legs are
that by “bending the knees laterally, rather stronger than the arms, therefore it is economical
than under the body the draught of the latter to obtain all the power possible from the lower
is decreased, or, in other words, the whole of limbs” (p. 35). He added that learners tended to
the body remains nearer the surface of the use the arms with all the power possible, and
water, and consequently the resistance to its thus pulled the body along (figure 1.4).
progress is much less” (p. 93).
Figure 1.3 Breaststroke in the 19th century. Pulling
with straight arms and drawing the knees under the
body were common faults. From Sachs 1912.
William Wilson (1883) said that “another mis-
taken idea is that the propelling part of the kick Figure 1.4 Breaststroke arm action in the 1920s.
is obtained from the soles of the feet; these mis- From Bachrach 1924.

--- OCR from Page 21 Image 1 ---
ARM ACTION
OF BREAST STROKE

SIDE VIEW

--- Page 22 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 7
Descriptions in Western Literature
Only in the last 400 years have references to swimming techniques appeared in books. Early
examples say little, mainly because stroke analysis was still in its infancy and underwater
observation nonexistent.
Although Nicolaus Wynman wrote the first book on swimming, Colymbetes, sive de arte
natandi et festivus et iucundus lectu (published in 1538 by H. Steiner of the University of
Ingolstadt, Augsburg, Swabia), an earlier book, The boke named the governour by Sir Thomas
Elyot (published in 1531 by Thomas Berthelet in London), briefly discussed swimming as an
important part of the education of gentlemen. (Copies of The boke named the governour, 258
folios, are housed in Cambridge University Library and the British Museum.)
But it was Wynman’s book, Colymbetes, that first instructed Europeans that the human
stroke was the stroke “which all must learn as the scientific stroke.” Colymbetes is a little
book in crabbed Latin, full of abbreviations and mistakes or misprints. Wynman, a German
Swiss professor at Ingolstadt University, mentioned that the cogent reason for not learning
to swim had been the mistaken belief that the souls who are confined to hell have to cross
the river Styx by swimming. If they cannot swim, how would they cross?
Within the next 50 years, two more books of note followed. Historia de gentibus
septentrionalibus Romae (History of the Northern People) by Olaus Magnus was published in
Rome by Magno Gotho in 1555 and discussed swimming among the other leading customs
of northern people. The other book was De arte natandi (The Art of Swimming) by Sir Everard
Digby, published in England in 1587 but written in Latin because it was considered vulgar in
certain quarters to write in English. Both books advocated breaststroke in preference to the
more primitive forms of swimming that existed at the time (Cureton 1934).
Had Digby written in his own language, as Elyot did, his book would have sold better and
also been too well known to have been so readily plagiarized or translated without
permission. As it was, Digby’s work was translated three times: twice into English and once
into French. The French edition was translated into German, Spanish, and Italian. An
abbreviated translation of Digby’s work was published in 1595 by Middleton. Another,
published in 1658, professing to be original, was an almost literal translation by Percey, who
claimed it to be his own work.
Next, Melchisedec Thevenot translated Digby’s original Latin work, De arte natandi, into
French, and it was published by T. Moette in Paris under the title of L ’art de nager in 1696,
four years after Thevenot’s death. In 1699, The Art of Swimming, translated back into English
from L ’art de nager, was published in London, the translator never suspecting that Thevenot
was not the original author (Thomas 1904). Thus Digby’s work was the only one known for
centuries to French and English swimmers, but few, if any, could have known that Digby had
been the original author because Thevenot was always given the credit for it. Even that great
scholar Benjamin Franklin, who got to the root of most things he touched, quotes Thevenot
without the slightest suspicion that the original author was English.
Thevenot described swimming “as an old sport which hitherto had not received the
investigation necessary to improve in efficiency.” During Thevenot’s time, breaststroke was
still considered the scientific stroke in Europe (Cureton 1934). Thevenot’s book was
regarded as the authoritative work on “scientific swimming,” as it was called then, and was
reprinted in 1764 and 1772.
In recognition of Thevenot’s perceived preeminence among swimming authors during a
century when swimming was considered a health hazard, Thevenot was inducted into the
International Swimming Hall of Fame in 1990, nearly 300 years after his translation of Digby’s
(continued)

--- Page 23 Text ---
8 Breakthrough Swimming
(continued)
work had been published. Although Thevenot was a recognized scholar in many fields, a
stronger case can be made for Digby’s inclusion in the International Swimming Hall of Fame.
Although Ralph Thomas (1904) claimed that Thevenot in his famous book had plagiarized
Digby’s work, written a century before, the prestigious British Library Catalogue simply states
that Thevenot’s book was “adapted” from Digby’s De arte natandi. Another point for
consideration is that Thevenot’s book was published four years after his death, and it is more
than likely that Thevenot only translated Digby’s work for his own scholarly satisfaction,
without intent to publish it. The latter explanations would appear to be more plausible,
particularly as Thevenot was a minor celebrity of his day, a highly respected and distin-
guished Oriental scholar, and a founder of the French Academy of Sciences. As librarian of
the Royal Library (from 1684), he collected many valuable books and manuscripts.
Nevertheless, he never went out of Europe, and he did not know how to swim.
The more recent evolution of swimming in Western culture is ably recorded by several
outstanding authorities, and especially so in the classic descriptions by Steedman (1867),
Wilson (1883), Sinclair and Henry (1903), Thomas (1904), Cureton (1934), and Carlile (1963).
From Breaststroke to Sidestroke reduce resistance by recovering one arm over
the water instead of underwater as in the breast-
Although humans are not ideally endowed by
stroke. This stroke became known as the English
nature to be highly proficient swimmers, they
overarm sidestroke, and descriptions by the
eventually discovered that improved technique
experts of the day were belabored with numer-
could produce surprisingly facile and dexter-
ous fastidious points of technique (figure 1.5).
ous propulsion. This fact explains the almost
obsessive fascination with stroke techniques in
the early years of swimming development.
For many, the improvement of swimming
skill became an interesting and fascinating in-
tellectual exercise as well as a test of physical
ability. More often than not, clues leading to
improved methods were observed in the tech-
niques of great natural athletes. The term natu-
ral athlete is worth proper understanding.
Broadly stated, it means an athlete who does
the right thing naturally, as part of his or her
true nature. Yet the progress of many a natural
athlete was stifled by the imposition of tech-
niques that interfered with the swimmer’s natu-
ral movement inclination. Of course, much was
heard about their coaches’ successes but little
about their failures.
When organized competitive swimming
started in the early 19th century, the sidestroke
became the standard racing style. Both arms
remained submerged throughout, and the legs
performed a wide scissors kick with opening Figure 1.5 Early chart showing the mechanics
and closing movements that resembled walk- of the sidestroke. From Sinclair and Henry 1903,
ing. Swimmers eventually found they could p. 81.

--- Page 24 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 9
It’s easy to imagine how the sidestroke Henry (1903) diagrammed overarm sidestroke
evolved from the breaststroke. In effect, the technique and wrote that the great exponents
early underarm sidestroke was really the breast- of the art of swimming were the Englishmen
stroke swum with the body turned on its side. Nuttall and Tyers, and no other nation had
Swimmers found that by turning onto their swimmers capable of extending them. The kick
side they encountered less water resistance. of the improved stroke that these swimmers
Sachs (1912) says, “It is necessary to cleave the used was a marvelous screw-like leg kick (scis-
water with the head or shoulder in order to sors kick), which also gained J.A. Jarvis marked
avoid undue resistance” (p. 133). At first, the supremacy in England (figure 1.8).
sidestroke was swum with both arms in the
water during both pull and recovery; this was
known as the underarm sidestroke (figure 1.6).
Figure 1.6 “A figure swimming on the side, but
it is intended for the sidestroke.” From Reichel
1897.
With the start of widely organized swim-
ming championships in England in 1871, the
Figure 1.8 The Jarvis kick. From Sinclair and
quest for speed encouraged even more swim-
Henry 1903, p. 83.
mers to improve their stroke efficiency (Sinclair
and Henry 1903). This desire for technical im-
J.A. Jarvis won many English champion-
provement was increased by the fact that until
ships with the use of what came to be known as
1906, there were no separate events for differ-
the “Jarvis kick.“ Jarvis was the “first to dis-
ent strokes. Except for the breaststroke, which
cover that certain movements of the feet were
was sometimes swum as a novelty item, swim-
of definite assistance in giving power to the
mers competing in a single race used any stroke
English side-overarm stroke and of improving
they liked (Counsilman 1968).
its speed“ (Sachs 1912, pp. 139-140).
Realizing the superior speed of the English
H.D. Faith of the Otter Club describes Jarvis’s
overarm sidestroke (figure 1.7), racers aban-
kick in a small brochure titled The Over-Arm
doned the underarm stroke and recovered one
Side Stroke (1912):
arm over the water (Cureton 1934). Sinclair and
The swinging forward of the top leg makes
the water around the leg wash forward in
the direction the leg is swinging. In the case
of the under leg a back wash is created. As
the legs are whipped together the top leg,
coming back, meets and grips the water
which is still being washed forward, and
the under leg, coming forward, meets the
wash going backward, the screw-like action
of the legs giving a continuous grip of the
Figure 1.7 The English overarm sidestroke. From water and making the stroke a continuation
Sachs 1912, p. 134. of screw and wedge (Sachs 1912, p. 140).

--- Page 25 Text ---
10 Breakthrough Swimming
Faith’s description indicates how advanced deed, and is confined to the head and
the skill of lucid stroke analysis had become. Of shoulders. It is mentioned only to assure
even greater interest is that Faith gives one of those who try this stroke that they cannot
the few references to the flow reactions of the do without it even to a modified extent
water that exist in the historical literature. (Sachs 1912, pp. 142-143).
The adoption of the English overarm side-
History shows the double overarm sidestroke
stroke showed a growing awareness of the
to have been a cul-de-sac in the development of
importance of decreasing resistance in propor-
swimming. Because of the constant change in
tion to speed. The emphasis on the leg action
body position and the consequent lack of con-
was carried over from breaststroke swimming,
tinuity, the stroke was not very successful.
and the indications are that at this stage, a full
appreciation of the arms’ potential for propul-
The Trudgen Stroke
sion still did not exist. Nor did there appear to
be much concern about developing a more John Trudgen was born at Poplar, London, on
continuous mode of progression, other than May 3, 1852, and went to Buenos Aires with his
the fact that sidestroke swimmers were in- parents in 1863. While in Buenos Aires, he
clined to insert an extra tiny wedge (Jarvis) or learned the South American Indian stroke from
flutter kick (Nuttall) into the closing phase of the natives, which was later named the trudgen
their leg actions. stroke (figure 1.9) after his first appearance in a
In his classic work The Swimming Instruc- swimming race in England on August 11, 1873.
tor (1883), William Wilson describes the method
of the improved English overarm sidestroke.
The stroke’s popularity was apparent, and a
number of swimmers laid claim to having been
the first to use it. Harry Gurr—called the “Pocket
Hercules“ because of his short stature, healthy
red skin, fair hair, and neat physique—and
Harry Gardner of Woolwich were the first who
won any races of importance by lifting one
hand out of the water and carrying it in the air
beyond the head. Figure 1.9 The trudgen stroke.
The influence of the dominant leg kick of
traditional breaststroke was hard to shake off.
English spectators were startled when
As a result, the pioneers were slow to appreci-
Trudgen won his first race, the English 160-
ate the potential power of the arms. Sachs
yard handicap, with a most unusual stroke.
(1912) describes how the double overarm stroke
The idea for a double overarm stroke came
was taught:
from observing his unusual technique, which
In the double overarm stroke, the left arm later was to become the basic arm stroke of the
is brought as far forward as it will go—the crawl. (Keep in mind that the typical alternate,
head being immersed and even turned overarm windmill stroke of the Pacific Island-
slightly on to its left side in order to give ers had been swum for hundreds of years.
the arm full stretch. As the left arm is Only when this action became part of Western
pulled back towards the body, this ten- swimming culture, after its rediscovery by the
dency towards turning on the left side will Australians, did it receive its present name of
be increased, and the right arm has thus crawl stroke. See pp. 15 and 16 for more infor-
the opportunity of coming clear of the mation.)
water. The arm is then stretched ahead as The difficulty with the trudgen stroke was
far as possible, and the body rolls back on that it lacked continuity; in fact, it was very
its right side again. It is necessary to ob- jerky because it timed one breaststroke kick to
serve here that this roll is very slight in- every two arm strokes. An attempt was made

--- Page 26 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 11
to overcome this handicap by combining the According to Sinclair and Henry (1903, p.
scissors kick of the sidestroke with the trudgen 87), Trudgen’s championship swim was de-
arm action. The kick, originally performed with scribed in the Swimming Record (August 12,
considerable knee-bend, was narrowed and 1873) by the editor, R.P. Watson:
the legs were held straighter, but the timing of
His time was very fast, particularly for
the side scissors kick still prevented a perfectly
one who appears to know but little of
continuous arm action (figure 1.10).
swimming, and should he become more
finished in style, we shall expect to see
him take a position almost second to none
as a swimmer.
I question, indeed, if the swimming
world ever saw a more peculiar stroke
sustained throughout a 160 yards race.
Here we had a man swimming apparently
easy, turning very badly, and when fin-
ished, appearing as though he could have
gone at least another 80 yards at the same
pace. His action reminds an observer of a
style peculiar to the Indians; both arms are
thrown partly sideways, but very slov-
enly, and the head kept completely above
water.
Sinclair and Henry (1903) agreed that
Watson’s opinion was well borne out, for
Trudgen afterward became one of the speediest
a
sprint swimmers of his time, and his peculiar
action became known as the trudgen stroke.
Trudgen swam high out of the water, thrusting
both arms in front of him with his chest and
head well raised but practically in the same
position as a breaststroke swimmer.
As a result of Trudgen’s influence, consider-
able experimentation followed with double
overarm swimming. Many swimmers still
wished to remain on their sides, however, be-
cause they feared that swimming in a flat posi-
tion on the chest would cause too much frontal
resistance, so they developed a stroke in which
they turned from side to side to enable an
alternate recovery of each arm.
There was no mention of a regular breathing
method within the rhythm of the trudgen stroke.
One can only guess how this important aspect
of swimming technique evolved. Perhaps, as
often happens, it was by chance; as a double
overarm swimmer was turning from one side
b
to the other, the swimmer may have noticed
Figure 1.10 (a) Trudgen leg action. (b) Trudgen bubbles escaping from the mouth while the
arm action and body roll. From Bachrach 1924. face was submerged. Of course, the next step

--- OCR from Page 26 Image 1 ---
OF TRUDGEON
STROKE

SIOE View

--- OCR from Page 26 Image 2 ---
*~e

?

A UEUDGEON,
® ARMS OUToe WATER

&

<<"
“SIDE STROKE.
ry) - ARMS IN WATER

TRUDGEON,
BODY ROLLS

; J~~
SIDE STROKE,

ALWAYS ON SIDE

--- Page 27 Text ---
12 Breakthrough Swimming
would have been to learn to breathe in a regular of events, such as that contained in the litera-
rhythm with face-out-of-water inhalation fol- ture of Western civilization. To say that the
lowed by steady exhalation again as the face study of swimming was always an intellectual
submerged. exercise would be incorrect because a veritable
Trudgen’s hand-over-hand stroke was said hodgepodge of swimming strokes, completely
to be common to the ancients and the aborigi- out of sync with the assumed traditional se-
nes of America and Africa. When the British quence, were swum in various parts of the
first tried it, they could not continue it for any world. In fact, the evolution of the swimming
length of time. In the late 19th century many strokes provides a fine example of how history
forms of the trudgen stroke came to be swum can take one body of evidence and turn it
by sprint swimmers and water polo players. around.
Because the stroke was so fatiguing, few swim- Most accounts of the history of the swim-
mers could maintain it for over 200 yards, ming strokes have led us to believe that there
although in short races it won preference over had been but one pure line of ancestry—a se-
the English side overarm stroke. quence from dog paddle, also called the human
R. Thomas (1904) reported R.P. Watson as stroke, to breaststroke, sidestroke, then trudgen,
saying, “imitation of the trudgen or Indian and finally to our greatest creation, the crawl
stroke had completely demoralized London- stroke. In fact, this was not so because the
ers as swimmers.” The endeavor “to imitate principle of continuous propulsion, a deriva-
Trudgen, together with short distance handi- tive of the sport of ocean surfing, had already
caps, ranging from 80 to 90 yards have degen- been observed for thousands of years in the
erated Londoners to the level of mediocrity. overarm swimming strokes of the Polynesian
However, the stroke or a modification of it has peoples.
been taken up by water polo players with the Long before Magellan, Balboa, da Gama,
most undoubted advantage. The swimmer and Cook had broken out of the traditional
appears to go much faster than with other confines of European waters to pursue their
strokes.” voyages of discovery, the peoples of Polynesia
were naturally swimming the powerful over-
Swimming in the New World arm ocean stroke that later became known as
the crawl. While Europeans pursued their la-
Back in time, to the dawn of history, primitive borious methods of swimming, the indigenous
peoples used the dog paddle, a stroke that peoples of the South Seas had long been swim-
naturally involves the principle of continu- ming the more facile overarm stroke that pro-
ous propulsion. With the addition of a breath- vided continuous propulsion instead of a stop-
ing technique, only one step is needed for the start progression through the water.
transition from dog paddle to an overarm In 1849, Sidney Howard, an American, pub-
stroke, but somehow making this slight lished The Science of Swimming as Taught and
change never occurred to these early swim- Practiced in Civilized and Savage Countries, in
mers. Today dog paddle is used only as a which he referred to de la Perouse’s trip around
temporary expedient in teaching beginners the world in 1785. Captain de la Perouse said
to swim. that the Indians, or natives, of Easter Island
Around the 17th century, European swim- (one of the South Sea Islands) were remarkable
mers started to copy the swimming move- swimmers using overhand strokes.
ments of the frog, and from this came the stop- Not until the late 19th century did the self-
start action of the breaststroke, the first formal termed sophisticated swimmers of Europe
type of swimming in Western culture (see deign to dispense with their quiet, graceful,
p. 5). nonsplashing strokes and experiment with the
But recent research suggests a scattering ef- newfangled, hand-over-hand action displayed
fect that shows that the evolution of the swim- to them with telling effect by visitors from
ming strokes did not follow a precise sequence overseas.

--- Page 28 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 13
How would the Pacific Islanders have viewed later to revolutionize the sport of speed swim-
the swimming of the 19th-century Europeans? ming.
A raised hand would politely have covered When Duke Kahanamoku, the great Hawai-
their smiles at the sight of the awkward stop- ian swimmer, gave an exhibition of surfboard
start movements of the breaststroke, sidestroke, riding at Long Beach, California, on July 30,
and trudgen, and the theoretical explanations 1922, he also unintentionally showed the esti-
that accompanied their performance. mated crowd of 5,000 spectators how the an-
Let no one be mistaken: speed swimming cient Hawaiian huki technique of paddling
started in the majestic, thundering surf of the and flutter kicking was used for mounting a
Pacific Islands and not in the streams of the cresting wave. On July 31, 1922, the Long Beach
bucolic European countryside. In contrast, the Daily Telegram described it this way:
400-year literature of European swimming
Duke Kahanamoku, Olympic champion
shows a more studied, tedious, and slower
and in his prime the world’s greatest swim-
development of the sport than that which ex-
mer, gave an exhibition of surf board riding
isted naturally for thousands of years among
in front of the Hotel Virginia yesterday.
the Polynesians. (See “Descriptions in Western
Lying face down on the board with the
Literature,” p. 7.)
legs protruding into the water, the swim-
The carefully preserved (by word of mouth)
mer would begin a thrash with the legs
legends and mythology of the Polynesian
such as is used in swimming the crawl
peoples tell us that they swam their powerful
stroke. At the same time, he would paddle
oceanic overarm stroke long before it entered
with his hands furiously. This work was
Western culture to become the racing crawl
started just before the surf break. The rush-
stroke, a masterpiece of human ingenuity and
ing waters would lift the board and carry
adaptation. Speed swimming found its origins
it along at a terrific pace. As soon as the
hundreds of years ago on the warm-water surf
board was going well, the surfer would
beaches of the Pacific where surfing and swim-
pull himself up to a kneeling position and
ming were the natural sports of the islanders.
then gradually rise to his feet.
In the traditional surfing skill, known as the
huki, they used a rapid overarm windmill stroke For more information and early descriptions,
combined with a flutter kick to catch the gath- see King (1778), Ellis (1831), Thrum (1896),
ering momentum of a cresting wave. London (1911), Twain (1872), and Finney and
The huki was performed either on a surf- Houston (1996).
board or while lying prone on top of a wave as
it began to break. This basic movement, de- The Advanced Styles
signed to match the tremendous speed of a of the North American Indians
powerful incoming wave, was also the natural
swimming method of the islanders when swim- There is every indication that for centuries
ming in still water. In fact, there is distribu- Native Americans swam in great numbers with
tional evidence to show that throughout a superior overarm stroke, while the so-called
Oceania, children were taught to swim with civilized world persisted with breaststroke and
this method while lying on a short surfboard. sidestroke.
Many writers have described the thrill and Unfortunately, early organized swimming
excitement of speed as the essence of swim- in North America copied the European swim-
ming in the surf. Jack London (1911) on his visit ming style, particularly the methods brought
to Hawaii drew a vivid picture of how he to America by the colonial English. This was a
paddled the windmill stroke to catch a big fast- pity because more advanced styles already ex-
moving wave. Born in the surf out of the sheer isted in North America, as noted in 1739 in the
necessity to quickly generate speed, the huki, diary of the English colonial William Byrd,
or the crawl, as it became known when it spread founder of Richmond, Virginia, and a planter,
to Australia and other swimming nations, was satirist, and writer of diaries (Byrd 1928).

--- Page 29 Text ---
14 Breakthrough Swimming
Writing on September 30, 1739, Byrd noted: The mode of swimming the Mandans and
most of the other tribes used was quite different
This being Sunday, we were glad to rest
from the swimming in other parts of the world
from our labors; and, to help restore our
that Catlin had visited. Catlin described the
vigor, several of us plunged into the river,
method:
not withstanding it was a frosty morning.
One of our Indians went in along with us, The Indian, instead of parting his hands
and taught us their way of swimming. simultaneously, under the chin, and mak-
They strike not out both hands together ing the stroke outward, in a horizontal
but alternately one after another, whereby direction, causing thereby a serious strain
they are able to swim both farther and upon the chest, throws his body alter-
faster than we do (Byrd 1928). nately upon the left and the right side,
raising one arm entirely above the water
Even when the better American style was
and reaching as far forward as he can, to
exported to England 100 years later in an 1844
dip it, whilst his whole weight and force
London exhibition by two Native Americans
are spent upon the one that is passing
from the Ojibbeway Nation—Flying Gull (We-
under him, and like a paddle propelling
nish-ka-wen-bee) and Tobacco (Sah-ma)—the
him along; whilst the arm is making a
English paid little attention and refused to
half-circle, and is being raised out of the
change, despite the obvious superiority of the
water behind him, the opposite arm is
Native American swimming style. This fore-
describing a similar arch in the air over his
runner of the modern crawl stroke was de-
head, to be dipped in the water as far as he
scribed in The London Times (April 22, 1844) as
can reach before him, with the hand turned
being totally “un-European,” declaring that
under, forming a sort of bucket, to act
the Indians thrashed the water violently with
most effectively as it passes in its turn
their arms like sails of a windmill and beat
underneath him.
downward with their feet blowing with force
and performing grotesque antics. Catlin called it a “bold and powerful mode
of swimming” though lacking in grace. Still
The Mandan Indians Catlin noted that the stroke used by the Mandan
people helped them avoid much of the fatigue
In his A Manual of Swimming (1867), Charles and strain inherent in other strokes, preserving
Steedman quoted George Catlin’s memoirs on their strength. (Adapted from Steedman 1867,
the habits of the Mandan Indians. Catlin de- pp. 192–193).
scribed a place half a mile or so from the village
where the women and girls went every sum- The Crawl Stroke
mer morning to bathe in the river. All the
people learned to swim well; even the worst Because organized competitive swimming first
swimmer would fearlessly enter the rushing started in England in the late 19th century, it
current of the Missouri River, crossing the was natural that English swimming methods,
river with ease. such as the overarm sidestroke and the trudgen
According to Catlin, all American Indians stroke, would spread to the rest of Europe and
knew how to swim; they learned and taught it be copied there, although more advanced
well. Many tribes spent their entire lives on the double overarm methods actually existed in
shores of lakes and rivers, paddling across the Pacific Islands and other warm maritime
them in fragile bark canoes that were prone to countries. In fact, there can be no doubt that
accidents, “which often throw the Indian upon from time immemorial, overarm swimming
his natural resources for the preservation of his strokes had existed in countries bordering on
life.” Also in times of war, the Indians had to warm tropical seas. This was particularly true
plunge into and swim across wild streams and of the Pacific where the natives had swum a
rivers when they had no canoes or boats. type of overarm stroke that was later to be

--- Page 30 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 15
known as the crawl stroke (figure 1.11). But, won. Then Cavill and Davis raced again, only
because no international governing body of this time Cavill’s legs were untied. Davis won
swimming existed at that time, there were no the second race.
visits with swimmers from countries outside of Dick Cavill, Tums’s brother, couldn’t believe
Europe. what he saw. After a few private time trials,
Dick was convinced that his brother really could
sprint faster without using his legs. Dick rea-
soned that when properly applied every ounce
of power must increase speed; therefore, the
scissors kick was radically wrong. The ques-
tion was to find the right kick.
Then Dick remembered seeing Alick
Wickham, a Rubiana sprinter, use an odd
straight-legged kick, learned from the natives
at Colombo, Ceylon. He experimented with it
Figure 1.11 The crawl stroke. From Sachs 1912,
and was surprised by the results. The kick
p. 145.
proved speedy from the very first trial.
Now he had the kick, but finding a harmoni-
However, the turning point in the develop- ous arm action bothered him considerably. By
ment of the crawl stroke came when Dick Cavill, the time Dick found it, the 100-yards champi-
a member of the famous Australian swimming onship was only a few days away. He entered
family that had originally emigrated to Austra- the race anyway, anxious to publicly test his
lia from England, realized that the side scissors new stroke. Dick started at a terrific pace and
kick actually retarded continuous propulsion. reached the 50-yard mark five yards ahead of
The probable sequence of events, as recon- the nearest competitor. However, due to his
structed by historians, was as follows: Accord- imperfect mastery of the new stroke, he was
ing to Carlile (1963), Fred Cavill, an English- passed by the speedy Bishop.
man, settled in Australia in 1879 and started a Even though Cavill was defeated, this race
swimming bath at Lavender Bay in Sydney gave coaches an idea of the value of this new
Harbor. Fred Cavill had six sons, three of stroke. (The peculiar action of the stroke earned
whom—Syd, Arthur (“Tums“), and Dick— it the name “the crawl.”). They immediately
played an important part in the crawl’s devel- embraced the new stroke and formed classes to
opment. teach it. The success was marvelous. Men who
In 1914, Syd Cavill wrote in the Sydney had been indifferent swimmers gained in apti-
Referee that while on a visit to Apia in Samoa, tude, good men improved, and soon the world
he raced a woman swimmer who gave him the was ringing with the news of the crawlers. At
hardest race of his life. Syd noted with amaze- Rubiana, Al Wickham used the crawl to swim
ment that she swam an overarm stroke but did 50 yards in 24 seconds. Then Dick Cavill swam
not kick at all. After watching her intently, Syd a phenomenal 100 yards in 58 seconds. Soon
tied his legs and found that he could swim as the stroke invaded Europe, eventually reach-
quickly with his legs tied as he could with his ing America in 1904 (Sullivan 1928, pp. 37–38).
legs free using any other stroke. Then he wrote Duke Kahanamoku (see also p. 13), the first
home and told Tums about it. The rest is history great Hawaiian Olympic swimmer, assured
(Carlile 1963, p. 133). questioners in 1912 that the crawl stroke “had
Sullivan (1928) relates how the original crawl always been natural to the Hawaiians,” while
stroke evolved in Australia, thus the name Alick Wickham, a Solomon Islander who lived
“Australian crawl stroke.” Sullivan retells the in Sydney at the beginning of the 20th century,
story told by Louis de B. Handley, an American and who once held the world’s 50-yard record
authority on swimming. Tums Cavill raced for a fairly long period, said that all children in
Syd Davis over 33 yards with his legs tied and these islands swam a form of crawl stroke.

--- Page 31 Text ---
16 Breakthrough Swimming
Wickham claimed that even before 1900 one of of reaching forward underwater as in the con-
his brothers, who was being educated in Sydney, ventional dog paddle action.
swam the crawl there on numerous occasions
but, possibly because he was not a speedy or The Development of Fundamentals
polished demonstrator, no particular notice was
It should not be thought that the crawl, the new
taken of him. Paradoxical as it may seem, Alick
wonder stroke, was accepted everywhere with
Wickham swam a perfect six-beat crawl stroke,
acclaim. To the contrary, some thought it was
but mainly because he was usually finished by
inelegant and others regarded it as very tiring.
75 yards, his stroke was not copied in its en-
Sinclair and Henry (1903) described the stroke
tirety. However, a two-beat, heavy, muscular
like this:
leg beat evolved, becoming known as the Aus-
tralian crawl (Kiphuth 1942). The swimmer appears to be crawling over
the water instead of being in it, hence
The Origin of the Term there is much splashing. It cannot be said
that the action is graceful, but it certainly
Crawl Stroke
is particularly speedy, as Cavill has swum
Carlile (1963) gives two versions on how the a 100 yards in a 44 yards’ bath in the
term crawl stroke may have originated: remarkable time of 58 3/5 seconds (p. 23).
1. When Alick Wickham, a boy from the The early crawl stroke was a difficult stroke
Solomon Islands, was first seen swimming his to swim because it was born without a breath-
strange continuous overarm stroke in Australia ing technique. The first crawl swimmers swam
in a 66 yards under-10 years handicap, George as far as they could on one breath, before lifting
Farmer, a prominent Sydney coach, excitedly the head forward out of the water to take an-
exclaimed, “Look at that kid crawling.” other breath. A workable method of breathing
came later.
2. The second version of the origin of the
The new method could be used only for
term is that 15-year-old Dick Cavill, the stroke’s
short distances because it consumed energy
first great exponent, burrowed his head so
rapidly. The first swimmers to use the crawl
deep below the water’s surface while swim-
were mainly those who had grown up doing
ming the new stroke that he persistently swam
the trudgen stroke, and few could use it to
over his rivals who complained that young
complete the 100-yard racing distance. They
Cavill was “crawling all over me.”
swam trudgen for most of the distance before
However, in his benchmark book A Manual switching to the crawl to perform a spectacular
of Swimming (1867), Charles Steedman gives grandstand finish.
evidence of a much earlier origin of the term: The early crawl swimmers bore little resem-
“An easy method for a person to learn to swim blance to the polished technicians of modern
without the aid of a teacher is first to acquire swimming. They burrowed their heads in the
what is commonly termed the crawl or dog water, mouths shut tight and lungs starved for
stroke” (p. 78). air, and they let their arms fly round and round
Steedman then describes the action of the in a flurry of wild splashing, while the legs
dog paddle, a stroke still in use today for teach- kicked once for each arm pull, using a deep
ing beginners. It is possible that the term crawl knee-bend that caused each foot to hit the sur-
stroke may have long been in common use to face with a resounding whack.
describe the dog paddle and that George Despite all the excitement about the new
Farmer’s use of the term crawling in reference crawl stroke and its superior speed, closer ex-
to Wickham’s spectacular method of swim- amination would have revealed that crawl
ming might have inferred that Wickham was swimming, as it existed then, was no more than
crawling, or dog paddling, so fast that his arms a rough concept that worked, but it was by no
were actually coming out of the water, instead means a finely honed technique.

--- Page 32 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 17
Two Influential Coaches
The son of American parents, Louis de Breda Handley (1874–1956) was born in Rome,
where he was educated in the liberal arts and became adept in five different languages. He
came to America at the age of 22 to work as an importer. He coached the New York Athletic
Club and, with Charlotte Epstein, founded the Women’s Swimming Association of New York
(WSA), where he coached as a volunteer for 40 years and helped Charlotte Epstein put
women’s swimming on the map. Between them they produced a chain of great champions
such as Charlotte Boyle, Helen Wainwright, Gertrude Ederle, Aileen Riggen, Alice Lord,
Helen Meany, Eleanor Holm, and many others. He developed from novicehood 6 of the 12
girl stars who represented the United States in the Antwerp Olympic Games in 1920. One
of the most innovative stroke technicians in the history of the sport (his innovations included
developing the freestyle flutter kick), he became coach-educator to the world and
swimming’s first great communicator. When he died of a heart attack in New York at the age
of 82, his lifetime contributions had transformed the sport of swimming (Colwin 1998).
William “Big Bill” Bachrach (1879–1959) weighed 350 pounds and was probably one
of the most colorful coaches in the history of swimming. Together with Handley, Bachrach
set American and world swimming on course into the 20th century. He was head coach of
the Illinois Athletic Club in Chicago, as well as head coach of the 1924 and 1928 United
States Olympic teams. His men and women swimmers captured 12 gold medals in Paris in
1924 and 10 gold medals at the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics. He was most famous as the
mentor of Johnny Weissmuller, who was voted the greatest swimmer of the first 50 years of
the 20th century and second-best swimmer (behind Mark Spitz) of the entire 20th century.
His psychological handling of his swimmers was far in advance of his time, and he was also
among the first with the ability to develop each swimmer’s best individual style of swimming.
His development of Weissmuller’s crawl stroke established several fundamental principles—
for example the pull-push arm action—that became part of the stroke in use for many years
to come.
Bachrach developed four gold medalists at the 1924 Games: Johnny Weissmuller (100-
and 200-meter freestyles and 800-meter relay), Bob Skelton (200-meter breaststroke), Ethel
Lackie (100-meter freestyle and 400-meter relay), and Sybil Bauer (100-meter backstroke).
Weissmuller also won two gold medals at the 1928 Olympics in the 100-meter freestyle and
the 800-meter relay.
Nevertheless, the arrival of the crawl stroke became apparent that coordination was most
in Western culture was an important technical important, especially in reference to maintain-
development. It was the fastest stroke ever ing continuous propulsion.
developed, and it highlighted the fact that a As more people learned the crawl stroke, the
swimmer must produce continuous propul- various descriptions of the stroke needed to be
sion to maintain an even velocity. more clearly defined. Research of the literature
In an age before underwater motion picture shows that the following were the main ques-
analysis and before the advent of underwater tions asked during the early development of
observation windows, the first crawl stroke the crawl as well as the other swimming strokes:
pioneers learned the importance of streamlin-
1. Where and how should the hand(s) en-
ing, that we swim faster by reducing drag.
ter the water?
Keen observation resulted in the develop-
ment of even more basic principles in the effi- 2. Should the arm(s) be bent or straight
cient performance of the crawl stroke. It quickly during the pull?

--- Page 33 Text ---
18 Breakthrough Swimming
3. What should be the path of the arm(s) can crawl. His career spanned the years 1903 to
during the pull? 1910, and when he retired he had almost com-
4. Should the stroke be long and slow or pletely rewritten the world-record book. Daniels
short and fast? stood 6 feet 3 inches and had the lithe, lean,
symmetrical physique that was to become the
5. How should the arm(s) be recovered to
prototype of nearly all the great crawl champi-
start the next stroke?
ons of the 20th century.
6. What should be the timing of one arm in
Although Daniels was a fine all-round ath-
relation to the other?
lete who excelled at many other sports, he
7. What should be the timing of the legs in
decided to specialize in swimming. Only a year
relation to the arms?
after starting his career as a member of the New
8. When and how should inhalation and York Athletic Club, Daniels had won two titles
exhalation of air be timed into the rhythm at the St. Louis Olympic Games and became the
of the stroke cycle? first American to win an Olympic swimming
medal. He went on to win more Olympic titles
Thanks to trial and error and research in biome-
in Athens in 1906 and in London in 1908.
chanics, we can now answer these questions
Daniels started his career as a trudgen swim-
with far greater certainty.
mer. But in 1905, after meeting the great Austra-
During the first 30 years of the 20th century,
lian swimmer Barney Kieran during a tour of
a synthesis of crawl stroke fundamentals gradu-
England, he decided to master the art of crawl
ally emerged, the process greatly aided by
swimming. Although Kieran was a trudgen swim-
coaches Louis de B. Handley, William Bachrach,
mer, he was able to show Daniels how to swim
and Frank Sullivan, and swimmers such as
the new crawl stroke. Daniels tried the two-beat
Charles Daniels, Duke Kahanamoku, Johnny
rhythm of the Australian crawl (figure 1.12) but
Weissmuller, and many others. They devel-
found that his legs tended to sink. Then it dawned
oped the first great exponents of the stroke, and
on him that this was because the Australian style
their techniques became examples for others to
had been invented in buoyant sea water and that
follow. These coach-swimmer teams laid the
a faster kick was needed for freshwater swim-
foundations of modern American swimming,
ming to prevent the feet from sinking.
and as the 20th century progressed, their better
Daniels added another two beats to his action
understanding of fundamentals led to the in-
with the result that he was now swimming
vention of two new strokes, the back crawl and
what came to be known as a four-beat crawl.
the butterfly, as well as the modernizing of the
However, when swimming at top speed, Daniels
centuries-old breaststroke.
found that he possessed the dexterity to slip
The Development two more beats into his leg action, and so was
born the six-beat American crawl (figure 1.13).
of the American Crawl
Daniels did not consciously time his six-beat
Charles M. Daniels (1887–1973), the first of the kick with his arm action but allowed the legs to
great American swimmers, invented the Ameri- work independently. This was in contrast with
Figure 1.12 Annette Kellermann demonstrates the Australian crawl. From Kellermann 1918.

--- Page 34 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 19
Figure 1.13 The American crawl, the beginning of stroke analysis. From Sullivan 1928, p. 42.
the rhythm of two major beats combined with
four minor beats that was practiced by the
other early exponents of the American crawl.
(The tendency to prescribe a precise rhythm
between the actions of the arms and legs was a
carryover from the way breaststroke and side-
stroke were swum in the old traditional styles.)
In Search of a Breathing Technique
Coaches realized the need to improve the effi-
ciency of the crawl to enable its use for longer
distances. The ability to breathe easily and
regularly was the big problem. Cecil Healy,
one of the great early Australian swimmers,
developed the idea of turning the face side-
ways out of the water to inhale before return-
ing it to the center position to exhale underwa-
Figure 1.14 Crawl stroke breathing. From
ter. Some swimmers inhaled once every two
Bachrach 1924.
strokes, while others breathed every three
strokes, once to each side (also known as bilat- In stating the importance of correct breath-
eral breathing). However, most of the short- ing, Handley (1918) added that not only did
distance swimmers breathed only when they body position, balance, and rhythm rely largely
needed a breath. on efficient head-turning mechanics while
Healy said that a style of crawl swimming breathing but that the ability to swim longer
had long been indigenous to the South Seas distances relied on a regular supply of oxygen
and that he had seen this breathing method to the working muscles.
used naturally by all the native swimmers of Describing head-turning mechanics, Handley
Hawaii, who turned the head to inhale with said, “The head is twisted toward the upper
every stroke of the right or left arm, according shoulder to facilitate the intake of air, but the
to which side suited them best. This was done swimmer should make sure it is a twist only, for
by flicking the face sideways just as the for- if the head is raised the feet will unavoidably
ward hand entered the water (figure 1.14). sink and break the balance of the body.”

--- OCR from Page 34 Image 1 ---
Elbow hign—
arm relaxed

on recovery

Straight
up and down kick

Water line’
; under eyes ne ae
~ Legs move f
Straight-arm downward pull from hips Relaxed

knees

me

--- OCR from Page 34 Image 2 ---
LAND ATHLETES

BREATHE
NATURALLY

SWIMMERS
BREATHE N

IN) THROUGH MOUTH

THROUGH NOSE

--- Page 35 Text ---
20 Breakthrough Swimming
The addition of improved breathing tech- Some swimmers placed too strong an em-
niques to the American crawl soon enabled phasis on synchronizing the kick with the arm
swimmers to establish records over the longer stroke. In those early years, this forced timing
distances. This was particularly true of swim- must have limited the success of many talented
mers who, as school children, learned the crawl swimmers. Modern swimmers allow their legs
as their first stroke. to work in a natural cadence, independent of
their arms.
Experiments With the Crawl Kick
The Crawl Stroke Body Position
The first crawl swimmers were quick to notice
that the stroke was very flexible and open to Handley said that in crawl swimming the body
many variations. To make the stroke more suit- should be held as in standing upright on tiptoe,
able for distance swimming, Frank Sullivan, so that it formed a straight line, with the head
one of Chicago’s leading instructors, conceived erect, back slightly arched, legs together, and
the idea of combining the crawl with features of feet pointed. Resting on the water there should
the trudgen stroke. Sullivan’s trudgen-crawl be a gentle downward slant from head to feet.
was characterized by the insertion of a small Handley (1918) added that when a
straight-legged scissors kick with a narrow swimmer’s speed made it “possible to hydro-
spread as the swimmer turned the head to plane more effectively, the slant of the body
breathe (Cureton 1934, p. 98). should be more pronounced, but it must lessen
Continuing Sullivan’s idea of a more sub- gradually as the pace is decreased to cover
dued leg action, H.J. Handy, also of Chicago, lengthening courses” (p. 28). Handley’s idea
introduced a legless crawl, which as its name that a swimmer could actually begin to hydro-
implies involved not kicking at all. Although plane as speed increased was perhaps subcon-
Handy was successful using this method, this sciously inspired by the then-recent invention
idea did not survive long. of the motorized hydroplane. However, hydro-
Discussing the leg kick, Charles Daniels (1919) planing becomes possible only when a craft is
said, “The relative timing of the arms and legs moving quickly enough to allow the bow wave
in the American crawl can best be determined to come under the boat. The enthusiasm for this
by the individual or his coach; one with strong misconception must have caused many tal-
arms and weak legs can adopt a rapid arm ented swimmers to fall far short of their real
motion and a slow kick; one with strong legs potential.
can do the contrary. This is one of the stroke’s It should be noted that it is generally be-
best features, for it can be fitted to each person.” lieved that William Bachrach, in his coaching of
Handley (1918) said that the width of the leg the great Weissmuller, originated the incorrect
action should not exceed 14 inches between the concept of humans being able to hydroplane.
heels. A greater opening would cause the feet to However, it was Handley, not Bachrach, who
rise above the surface, and energy would be was first to mention this topic, long before
wasted. Handley said that the most successful Bachrach ever saw Weissmuller. It was not
crawl swimmers used a very narrow leg action, until Bachrach had published The Outline of
seldom more than 8 or 10 inches in scope. Swimming (1924) that he mentioned how he
Handley described a leg action in which the had taught Weissmuller “the hydroplane prin-
legs were held straight but not rigid, whip- ciple,” as he called it (pp. 123–124). This ac-
ping up and down alternately, while “closely count is a good example of how the pioneers of
imitating the movements one makes in walk- swimming often incorrectly rationalized the
ing on tip toe with mincing steps.” acceptance of new techniques.
Handley believed that the speed of the kick Handley advocated a slight side-to-side roll
should be adjusted to the individual. He said “to facilitate inhaling and to permit a clean
that most swimmers appeared to find the four- recovery of the arms. Excessive bending at the
or six-beat action to be the most effective. neck, waist, knees or ankles should be avoided.”

--- Page 36 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 21
The Crawl Stroke Arm Action better clear the surface, then moved out and
forward, simultaneously turning palm down,
Handley (1918) said that the arms should work
so that by the time it passes the shoulder line
alternately, one propelling while the other re-
the whole arm is in the prescribed position for
covered, each performing the same cycle of
another entry” (pp. 28–29).
movement, although the arm opposite the
Bachrach (1924) said that, during the pull,
breathing side dipped a little deeper due to the
the elbow should bend until it reaches an
heavier roll of the body toward it (figure 1.15).
angle of 45 degrees. The arm is bent so that
more surface area of the forearm is offered to
the water. The pull ends at the hip where the
muscles relax as the arm is brought out of the
water. The forearm and wrist stay relaxed
during recovery as the arm is carried out of the
water to the forward position. The action of
the right arm is similar. As the left arm comes
out, the right arm starts its pull from the
forward position, the hands at all times being
equidistant. The motion is a continuous rota-
tion; there is no break between one complete
revolution of the arms and the one that fol-
lows.
Crawl Stroke Timing
Handley stressed that proper timing of arm
and leg movements was essential to good swim-
ming despite “the belief that seems rather
Figure 1.15 Weissmuller demonstrates the crawl
prevalent that in the crawl the arms and legs
stroke arm action. From Bachrach 1924.
may work independently. Whatever number
of leg drives made per stroke, the wanted
He added that each arm should enter the rhythm is attained by performing one of the
water with the elbow slightly raised, forearm beats of each leg at the end of the pull on that
and hand aligned, palm down, fingers and side of the body, and this establishes perfect
thumb close together. The hand should cut the coordination.” This comment on the key to the
surface just before attaining full reach beyond timing of arms and legs was an astute observa-
the head, and dip down to its own side of an tion, made long before the advent of underwa-
imaginary line drawn between the eyes and ter observation windows. (It was not until
through the middle of the body. Then the arm 1977, when Dr. James E. “Doc” Counsilman
pressed forward underwater, so that by the published photographs of this timing in his
time it was comfortably extended it was slanted Competitive Swimming Manual (1977, p. 164)
slightly downward at a sufficient angle to effec- that this point was mentioned again in the
tively apply power. literature. Counsilman said that all types of
Handley said, “After catching smartly the crawl stroke had this timing in common.) With
arm sweeps backward, following a course par- great foresight, Handley commented that
allel to the center line of progression and main- “speed and endurance could only be gained by
taining strong pressure on the water until the accurate inter-timing of all movements.” How-
hand nears the thigh. Here the muscles are ever, modern swimmers are not taught to time
relaxed, the elbow is lifted and the arm drawn their leg kicks with the arm stroke, but rather
up and out. As the hand emerges from the to allow their legs to find their own natural
water it is bent back from the wrist, palm up, to counterbalancing action.

--- OCR from Page 36 Image 1 ---
SIDE VIEWS

ARM ACTION ~ CRAWL STROKE

--- Page 37 Text ---
22 Breakthrough Swimming
The Japanese Crawl Basically, the Japanese stroke consisted of a
rapid arm recovery that enabled the swimmer
in the 1930s
to overlap both arms submerged in front of the
The victorious Japanese at the 1932 and 1936 body. As each arm entered the water, it an-
Olympic Games introduced a method of crawl chored there in a stationary position while the
swimming eminently suited to their shorter other arm, which had been waiting in front of
stature, flexible bodies, short arms, and natu- the body for the entry of its opposite member,
rally strong leg drives. This new style was the commenced the drive.
result of filming in great detail the styles of The stroke was successful for the Japanese
Johnny Weissmuller, the 1928 Olympic 100- but had the disadvantage of causing a dead
meter champion, and Arne Borg of Sweden, the spot in propulsion. This occurred while one
1928 Olympic 1,500-meter champion. arm was recovering in the air and the opposite
The Japanese freestyle stroke was an adapta- arm was submerged and stationary in front of
tion of the Weissmuller stroke and the Arne the body. This threw the burden of ensuring
Borg stroke. Borg swam higher than continuous propulsion onto the leg drive. Un-
Weissmuller and had a faster, shorter arm ac- less the swimmer had a powerful kick, this
tion. The Japanese stroke fell somewhere be- resulted in lack of continuity to the overall
tween the strokes of these two great interna- stroke. The Japanese style of crawl swimming,
tional stars. The Japanese swam with their in modified form, was adopted by swimmers
shoulders fairly high and their legs quite low in of other countries without much success.
the water, using more knee-bend in the kick
The American Crawl
than Weissmuller.
The theory behind the Japanese arm stroke in the 1940s and 1950s
was that the middle arc of the 180-degrees from
full reach in front of the body to the finish at the Bob Kiphuth (1942) recommended a perfectly
thighs was the most effective range in the pull. flat body position, with the head and chest
The idea was to get to the point 45 degrees short fairly high, the water level just above the eyes,
of the full reach as quickly as possible and to the shoulders level with the water surface, and
recover after a 90-degree pull, or 45 degrees the horizontal axis through the shoulders at
short of the complete pull-through. right angles to the long axis of the body. He
Japanese Contributions
Swimming history holds many examples of the old adage, “Be right too soon and your word
will be ignored; be right too late and everyone is bored.” For example, rolling the body in crawl
swimming was considered a fault for more than 50 years until it was given credit for part of
the Australian 1956 world dominance. Actually, the victorious Japanese crawl swimmers at
the 1932 Olympics had used considerable body roll. But Western swimmers attributed the
Japanese ability to roll without setting up resistance to streamlined shoulders, which they
claimed were a characteristic of the Japanese physique. They argued a Japanese swimmer
could use body roll with impunity, but a Westerner who copied it would do so at peril.
Another classic example was the failure to heed another important principle discovered
by the Japanese. Back in the 1930s, Japanese swimmers had realized that it was more
efficient to swim with long strokes at a high tempo. Today, “distance per stroke” is considered
to be an important index of swimming efficiency.
History abounds with stories of how people came close to discovering important new
truths about swimming but were slow to follow up. For a long time, the pursuit of swimming
knowledge followed this desultory approach before scientific methods were used to analyze
stroke mechanics.

--- Page 38 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 23
advocated not dipping the shoulders or rolling catch is made, strong pressure can immediately
the body and said there should be no lunging or be exerted on the water. This means that there
hunching of one shoulder before the other. can be no stretching or overreaching of the arm.
Although the arms move in the shoulder joint, Kiphuth advocated that the direction of the
the shoulder should be fixed, with the body arm be slightly toward the middle line of the
moving over the arms–literally crawling. body, and after passing the vertical there is a
Kiphuth said that there should be decided push straight through at the end of the stroke
pressure on the water at all times and that the out past the thigh. There is no gliding of the arm
arm stroke was a working phase of catch, press, on the catch, and a full stroke is taken with no
pull, and push (figure 1.16). The catch was to be attempt to finish short. The maximum amount
in a line forward of the shoulder, with the arm of water must be engaged by the hand and
extended as far as a high elbow and wrist will forearm throughout the stroke with as little
permit. The elbow should be flexed enough to slide slip of the arm as possible. The broadest
give a strong set to the arm so that when the aspect of the hand and forearm should engage
the water at all times. A working phase of press,
pull, push indicates the necessity of such action
(Kiphuth 1942).
The Australian Crawl
in the 1950s
Circa 1954, the Australians, after their early in-
troduction of the crawl at the turn of the 20th
century, once more took to speculating on ways
to improve swimming speed. They sought to
eliminate the tiring effects of overkicking, par-
ticularly at middle and long distances, and to
eliminate the stilting effect on the arm stroke
caused by swimming too flat and trying to pull
by merely rotating the arms in the shoulder joint.
In the new Australian technique, the hands
obtained a longer purchase on the water by
entering through the bow wave that precedes
the swimmer. The shoulders were not held flat
on the surface, as with Bob Kiphuth’s Ameri-
can crawl, but were allowed to roll with the
rhythm of the arm action. The resultant rota-
tion of the torso brought the powerful large
trunk muscles into action. As one arm finished
stroking, the other was already propelling, and
they likened their timing to the “split second
coordination of a paddle-wheel steamer.” The
action of the legs was subdued but could be
speeded up quite noticeably in sprinting.
Continuing the Australian trend, James
Counsilman was one of the developers of the
Figure 1.16 One version of the American crawl broken tempo style of crawl swimming with
in the 1940s was characterized by an overlapping emphasis on the arm action and the relegation
arm action and a wide kick like riding a bicycle. of the kick to that of stabilizing agent. Together
From Armbruster 1942. with the Australian coaches, Sam Herford and

--- Page 39 Text ---
24 Breakthrough Swimming
Frank Guthrie, Counsilman experimented with ming on the back (figure 1.17). He rotated his
dragging or resting the legs during the arm arms continuously as in the prone crawl and
action without affecting the continuous action did a straight up-and-down leg thrash, with
of the arms (Colwin 1969). the action starting from the hip. The knees were
relaxed, partly bent, and the loose ankles per-
The Backstroke mitted a whiplash kick. His face remained clear
of the water while he inhaled through the mouth
In Colymbetes, Wynman (1538), author of the and out through the nose.
first book in the world on swimming, gives the
first reference to swimming on the back:
He adds a tale of a man on his back pre-
tending to be a corpse: “but move your
hands with swift movements as if shaking
them like the birds do their wings, move
them like the blade of a ploughshare when
you sharpen it on a grindstone, or as if you
were cutting smooth water. Keep as much
breath as you can and blow through the
nose (p. 45).
After this early description of swimming on
the back, several centuries followed during
which there were no significant developments
in this form of swimming other than a back-
stroke developed by the Europeans that was
really nothing more than an inverted breast-
stroke, consisting of a double-overarm recov- Figure 1.17 Backcrawl as swum by pioneer
ery and an upside-down breaststroke kick, per- swimmer Harry Hebner. He used a bent-arm
formed in the same rhythm as breaststroke. recovery and a straight-arm pull. From Bachrach
Then in the early 20th century, H.J. Handy of 1924.
Chicago introduced a trudgen backstroke, in
Hebner made his international debut in 1908
which the arms stroked alternately. As the right
as a 17-year-old member of the 1908 Olympic
arm reached forward behind the shoulder to the
team. Four years later, in Sweden, he won a
entry with the palm turned outward, the other
gold medal in the 100-meter backstroke and a
arm was allowed to drift in the water next to the
silver medal on the 800-meter freestyle relay
hip. The right arm then pulled outward and
team. A quaint comment on Hebner’s back-
downward in a full sweep that ended at the hip.
stroke appeared in the Swedish official report
While the right arm was pulling, the swimmer
of the Games: “Hebner swam alternately with
recovered the left arm overhead with a relaxed
arm stroke and leg crawl.”
elbow and wrist. Until this stage had been
The greatest female backstroke swimmer of
reached, the legs trailed close together, straight
the 1920s era was another Chicagoan, Sybil Bauer,
but relaxed. Then, as the left arm started its
also of the Illinois Athletic Club, and she brought
sweep, the legs opened and performed a scis-
the backstroke to a new level of development,
sors kick that ended just as the left arm com-
her times at one stage being faster than the men’s
pleted its sweep. As in the trudgen stroke, there
records. She swam with her head tilted forward
was a short glide before the next stroke started.
and chin close to the chest. She flexed her knees
The Origin of the Backcrawl slightly as she kicked, and the depth of her leg
drive depended on whether she was sprinting or
Harry Hebner invented the crawl backstroke swimming at middle-distance pace. She rolled
by converting crawl stroke principles to swim- very little, using her arms independently of the

--- OCR from Page 39 Image 1 ---
USE OF ARMS IN

CRAWL (\ BACK STROKE
a
TOP_VIEW a
NX
AY
c \

ARM” . \

RELAXED “ ss . i}

--- Page 40 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 25
body. Her body position was very low, with her had three unique features: Kiefer recovered his
shoulders seldom appearing on the surface. Each arms, elbows held straight, with a low lateral
hand, palm turned outward, entered behind the swing over the water. He entered each arm
head, just wide of the shoulder line. The hand wide of the shoulder and instead of using the
then pressed downward and completed its pull customary deep pull, he pulled with a straight
at the thigh. Here the palm turned outward and arm just below the surface. Kiefer’s style was
the elbow led the recovery, almost like an upside- universally accepted for many years, although
down crawl recovery. As the elbow passed the some swimmers recovered the arms with a
shoulder the forearm was raised above it, ex- bent elbow and introduced a slight bend at the
tending the arm for the next entry. elbow during the pull.
The Kiefer Style The Bent Arm Backstroke Pull
In 1935, Adolph Kiefer, a Chicago school boy, For the first time in the literature, Kiphuth and
swam the backstroke 100 yards in 57.6 seconds, Burke (1951) described a bent arm pull in the
and then went on to win the 1936 Olympic 100- backstroke. The swimmer appearing in the
meter backstroke title. His technique, described accompanying motion pictures was Allan
by Armbruster (1942), became known around Stack, the 1948 Olympic backstroke champion.
the world as the “Kiefer style” (figure 1.18) and Kiphuth and Burke described the backstroke
as an alternate overarm action, synchronized
with an alternate up-and-down beat of the
legs, six kicks to a full cycle of the arms. The
arm stroke started with the arm extended at
full length behind the head and slightly out-
side the shoulder.
The hand slices the water, with the little
finger entering first. The catch is made
with a straight arm, but as the arm ap-
proaches the side horizontal the elbow
bends to enable the hand and broad sur-
face of the forearm to drive as much water
as possible backward to the finish of the
stroke at the thighs. The recovery is made
out of water with either a straight or bent
arm (p. 101).
The Breaststroke
Frank Sachs (1912) advised beginners that “it is
to the leg stroke that the swimmer must chiefly
depend for success.” However, although
Steedman (1867) had advised against it nearly 50
years earlier, Sachs incorrectly spoke about draw-
ing the legs up under the body. Sachs then con-
tinued as follows: “The legs are straightened and
as wide apart as possible, before bringing them
together very smartly and to as nearly as pos-
sible make them touch” (p. 20). This technique,
Figure 1.18 The Kiefer backstroke. From known as the wedge kick, became extinct later in
Armbruster 1942. the century to be replaced by the whip kick, in

--- Page 41 Text ---
26 Breakthrough Swimming
which the swimmer propelled with the soles of even distribution of effort, constant propul-
the feet rather than by a closing of the legs. sion, and less stoppage between arm and leg
William Bachrach (1924, p. 106) advocated movements.
learning the breaststroke first because if a per- The outward and downward pull lifted the
son learned a faster stroke first, the chances upper body higher, enabling the swimmer to
were that there would be no interest in later inhale freely and deeply. The shorter pull re-
learning this slower method of swimming. duced the inward and forward movements of
Bachrach did not agree with the usual frog the arm recovery, thus minimizing resistance
kick taught at that time. Bachrach said, “I don’t and providing a more powerful backward com-
know why it is called the frog kick because if we ponent to the stroke.
really kicked like a frog we would get nowhere. The legs were set in motion as the arms
Recall the size of the frog’s foot and the length finished their pull. The knees were lowered
of his leg in relation to the rest of his body. He and opened easily, without separating the heels;
gets almost as good a push against the water as then the feet moved slowly apart until, finally,
you would get jumping on dry land. The hu- with a combined movement, the legs were
man foot is a small thing in relation to the rest kicked out vigorously and snapped strongly
of the body, and compared to the relationship together.
of the frog’s foot to his body.” For the stroke to be perfectly timed, the
Bachrach’s method of breaststroke kicking closing of the legs was timed to occur as the
was to spread the legs to a wide straddle posi- arms attained full reach ahead so that the body
tion, with the knees bent and turned out side- shot forward on the momentum imparted by
ways, an action that required especially supple the kick. Air was inhaled through the mouth
joints. From the full spread position, Bachrach during the drive of the arms and exhaled
advocated giving the legs a vigorous slap in- through the nostrils while the arms were re-
ward. Bachrach said, “It is really one motion, covering.
reaching the starting position and slapping
back, like the snapping of a whip. Instead of Tempo and Timing
resembling the frog’s kick, it is like the flapping
Gilbert Collins (1934) advocated that tall swim-
of two fishes tails.” This was, in effect, yet
mers with long legs should reduce the width of
another version of the now-obsolete wedge
the kick, while short swimmers should use a
kick, which had the negative effect of merely
wider kick. He compared the actions of the two
washing the water sideways over the legs in-
leading male swimmers in the 1928 Olympics
stead of directly backward.
in Amsterdam, where Tsuruta (Japan) defeated
Handley’s Improved Style Rademacher (Germany) by using a quicker
stroke. The Japanese swimmer was 5 feet 4
Handley (1918) took the lead in coaching an inches tall, while Rademacher stood 6 feet. He
improved form of breaststroke swimming, in said that the big German swimmer, with his
which the arms were no longer swept back long limbs and wide sweep, could not match
close to the surface until at right angles to the the stroke speed of his smaller rival.
body, a method that had been incorrectly used David Armbruster (1942) said that breast-
for the best part of a century. Instead, Handley stroke swimming speed could be increased by
taught swimmers to take a shorter stroke and shifting from a wide lateral arm movement to a
pull down as well as outward. Also, the arms more downward movement to get the arms
and legs did not drive and recover together but under the body (figure 1.19). He said that “speed
alternately. The benefit derived from the alter- being the chief objective in competitive swim-
nate timing of arms and legs resulted in a more ming, not only must the stroke be streamlined

--- Page 42 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 27
to overcome resistance but power must also be
developed” (p. 176).
Armbruster discussed various types of arm
and leg actions for individual body types. His
text describes, for the first time in the literature,
the differences in timing with the total stroke
when using a wide knee-spread kick, as well as
the timing to be used in the narrow knee-
spread kick.
Mid-20th-Century European Style
Bela Rajki (1956) described a fully stretched
body position that formed a slight angle with
the water surface. The head controlled body
position, and care was taken to avoid too low a
head position, which would bring the feet up
too high and spoil the effectiveness of the leg
drive; conversely, if the feet sank too low the
body angle would cause resistance.
Rajki advocated a wide arm action with the
arms moving sideways, down, and back simul-
taneously. The wrists were bent slightly and the
hands cupped to engage the water and pull the
body forward. As the outward phase of the pull
ended in line with the shoulders, a gradual bend-
ing of the elbows changed the action into a push
or inward sculling motion at the end of which the
hands, palms turned inward, came under the
chest with forceful pressure applied to the water.
The arms were thrust forward, level with the
chin, and shoulders hunched to reduce water
resistance and help the body slide forward.
In the leg action, the legs were drawn up,
with the soles turned slightly inward facing
each other, the knees spreading farther and
farther apart as the movement progressed.
When the knees reached maximum bend the
feet, now quite close to the hips, were turned
outward with extreme dorsi-flexion. The kick
was performed “with an outward circular
Figure 1.19 Breaststroke in the 1930s featured thrust moving quickly and forcefully back-
a more downward arm movement. Influenced by wards and downwards,” finishing with a
the way the breaststroke kick was used in the new straightening of the knees and closing of the
butterfly-breaststroke, the kick also became thighs. The feet were rotated inward, with the
narrower when swimming the orthodox soles pressing the water with the greatest pos-
breaststroke. From Armbruster 1942. sible pressure.

--- Page 43 Text ---
28 Breakthrough Swimming
The leg and arm actions followed one an-
other, with the legs being drawn up as the
hands reached the level of the shoulders and
continued until the hands came under the chin,
from which position the kick joined in the
forward movement of the body, brought about
by the arm action. Inhalation took place as the
arm action ended. Rajki mentioned that the
several variations of the breaststroke differed
in style and coordination according to indi-
vidual physique.
The Butterfly-Breaststroke
Breaststroke has undergone many changes as a
competitive swimming style. During the 1930s
the breaststroke had to withstand the onslaught
of the butterfly-breaststroke swimmers. Butter-
fly-breaststroke was a hybrid stroke that com-
bined the butterfly arm action with the breast-
stroke kick (figure 1.20), and it came about when
swimmers found a loophole in the breaststroke
rules as they existed at that time, namely in that
the law made no stipulation about the need to
recover the arms forward from the breast.
The butterfly-breaststroke (butterfly arm
action with orthodox breaststroke kick) very
quickly became the fastest method of compet-
ing in breaststroke races. The orthodox breast-
stroke swimmer, using the traditional action,
became a rarity in competition because the
International Olympic Committee (IOC) was
not in favor of adding an extra event to the
Olympic program to accommodate the two
vastly different styles of swimming. In fact, at
one stage, the breaststroke was almost in dan-
Figure 1.20 The now-extinct hybrid butterfly-
ger of becoming extinct as a racing stroke.
breaststroke in which the breaststroke kick was
A saga of legalistic wrangling ensued for 20
combined with the butterfly arm action. From
years as swimming administrators attempted
Armbruster 1942.
to sort out the muddle of their own making. It
was not until the Melbourne Olympic Games The result of this ruling was a spectacle that
in 1956 that reason prevailed and butterfly the breaststroke traditionalists could not have
became a separate event and breaststroke was imagined! A new trend rapidly developed in
swum as breaststroke—not butterfly. (The which swimmers, particularly the Japanese
hands had to be recovered forward from the swimmers, took to swimming long distances
breast, at least when swimming on the surface. underwater with a resultant long pull through
While swimming underwater, the swimmer to the hips. They would surface for a breath,
was permitted to use a full length pull through then off they would go on their underwater
to the hips.) journey.

--- Page 44 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 29
In February 1957, in response to this devel- Swimmer, said that the remedy suggested by
opment, the FINA International Swimming FINA in Moscow “was worse than the original
Technical Committee (ISTC) recommended to complaint.” He offered the following solution:
Congress that no underwater swimming be a part of the head or body shall be above the
allowed in breaststroke and butterfly events. general surface of the water at least once dur-
Breaststroke was then legislated to surface ing each arm stroke. This would effectively
swimming with only one underwater pull and prevent underwater swimming and make judg-
one kick allowed after the pushoff from the ing possible. FINA finally got it right on Febru-
wall at the turn and an underwater glide al- ary 15, 1987, when, using wording not much
lowed after the starting dive (Colwin 1998). different than that suggested by Coach Hanson,
Apparently a big problem facing FINA’s they changed the breaststroke head rule to
rule makers was the semantics—as well as read: “During each complete cycle of one arm
translation difficulties between several lan- stroke and one leg kick, some part of the head
guages—of describing when a swimmer’s head of the swimmer shall break the surface of the
was or was not submerged under the surface. water” (Colwin 1998).
First, it was ruled that part of the head should
always break the surface of the water. This Breaststroke Development
resulted not only in a stilted action but in the in the 1960s
swimmers having to hold their heads too high
thus reducing the body’s streamlining. Some After breaststroke once more became a sepa-
swimmers were even ridiculously disquali- rate stroke, its evolution was characterized by
fied when their heads disappeared under their an increased attention to streamlining the stroke,
own bow waves. while also adapting it to different body types.
The result was a big debate as to when a In the process, variations in body build and
swimmer’s head was “above the general water stature, length of limb, muscularity, and indi-
level.” This rather nebulous description was vidual buoyancy became important factors.
later changed to read that the head should In the Australian and the American versions
always break the surface of the water. In 1980 of the stroke, the aim was to try to avoid
the FINA Congress in Moscow thought it would excessive up-and-down movement of the
be able to solve this problem by adopting the shoulders while trying to keep the entire body
recommendation of the ISTC to read that part as flat and as high as possible. The heels were
of the head should break the surface of the to be kept high enough so that they worked
water during each complete stroke. Instead the very close to the surface, both in recovery and
Congress decided that part of the head shall during the kick.
break the surface of the water throughout the On the other hand, the Europeans—particu-
race, a decision that really was no different larly the Russians—permitted and even en-
from the old rule (Colwin 1998). couraged the shoulders and torso to rise and
Thierry (1981) was concerned with the word- fall in the natural rhythm of the stroke. There
ing of the new rule, writing that the swimming was also a distinct difference between the leg
public had been led to believe that a “relaxed actions advocated by the two schools of thought.
interpretation of the rule was to be made that While Westerners preferred an ultraflat and
allowed the head to submerge, provided the almost static body position in which the legs
head broke the water level once on each arm were drawn up prior to the kick with a deep
cycle” (p. 2). This did not happen, and in knee-bend and hip flexion to preserve this po-
Thierry’s opinion, the new wording made the sition, the Russians in particular allowed the
problems facing the stroke and turn judges entire body to rise and fall while keeping an
worse than before. almost straight line down the front of the body
Salvation came when Howard Hanson, an to the knees, as the feet were recovered over the
Australian coach, writing in The International knees prior to delivering the kick.

--- Page 45 Text ---
30 Breakthrough Swimming
During this period the emphasis on a down-
ward and backward arm movement became
more pronounced. At the same time, the width
of the pull became narrower than it had been
before. The aim in the shorter, narrower arm
pull was not only to increase streamlining but
also to achieve a more effective application of
muscular strength and power while increas-
ing the quickness of the movement. The same
principle of quick movement was applied to
the leg kick, which also became narrower and
faster. It became apparent to coaches and swim-
mers alike that the narrower and quicker the
pull and the kick, the faster the swimmer
could go.
The Dolphin Butterfly Stroke
Henry Myers of the Brooklyn Dragon Swim
Club is generally credited with developing the
butterfly stroke. In 1933, while swimming
breaststroke in practice, as a novelty diversion
he tried pulling his arms through to his hips
and recovering them over the water like a
double freestyle arm recovery. He was amazed
to find he could beat his club’s best breast-
stroke swimmers in short practice swims by
combining his new double overarm action with
his usual breaststroke kick.
It seems unlikely that Myers had intended to
invent a new stroke because only the kick re-
sembled breaststroke. However, he and his
coach W.W. Robertson looked up the rules and
found to their surprise that the new stroke did
not contradict the rules in any way. They de-
cided that Myers should try out the stroke in
the 150-yard medley event at the Brooklyn
YMCA swim meet in December 1933 (Colwin
1998).
To everyone’s surprise, Myers beat the fa-
vorite, Wallace Spence, the American medley
champion. At first the odd-looking stroke took
the officials by surprise, but after Robertson Figure 1.21 The early dolphin butterfly stroke,
showed the rule book to the officials, Myers as performed by its pioneers, was swum with an
was not disqualified, and this set the precedent almost straight arm action, an excessive undulation
for future use of the stroke (figure 1.21). of the hips, and a very wide leg action. The legs
Note: In 1927 the German swimmer Erich kicked twice for every arm stroke cycle. The stroke
Rademacher, during a tour of the United States, was not permitted in competition until 1954. From
gained considerable advantage by bringing his Armbruster 1942.

--- Page 46 Text ---
History of the Swimming Strokes 31
arms over the water in a double overarm recov- combination of arm and leg action using two
ery as he approached the turn and also when he leg beats to each arm pull. He showed the
touched at the end of a race. Rademacher in- stroke’s speed potential by swimming 100 yards
sisted, even at that early date, that this in no in 60.2 seconds (Armbruster 1942, p. 24). How-
way infringed the rules of breaststroke swim- ever, the dolphin kick was ruled illegal because
ming (Colwin 1998). the legs moved in the vertical plane. Not until
From here the butterfly rapidly grew in popu- 1956 was the butterfly stroke allowed in Olym-
larity in school, college, and national competi- pic competition, simply because the IOC re-
tion in the United States. People began to take fused to add new competitions to the Olympic
it seriously and some even claimed to have program. Thus, for 21 years, the world of swim-
originated it. The early outstanding exponents ming had a new stroke with great potential but
were Lester Kaplan and Paul Friesel. with no event in which it could be legally
In December 1954, the IOC finally agreed to swum—a sad reflection on FINA and the IOC.
the inclusion of separate butterfly events, start-
ing with the 1956 Olympics in Melbourne, Use of the Dolphin Kick
Australia. However, in June 1956, it was an- in Starting and Turning
nounced that entries for the breaststroke and
butterfly events at the Olympics were to be FINA Rule SW 8.5 states: “At the start and at
limited by the IOC to only three competitors in turns, a swimmer is permitted one or more leg
breaststroke and butterfly together. This state- kicks and one arm pull under the water, which
ment showed that even after 20 years, the IOC must bring him to the surface. It shall be per-
still did not understand that the butterfly and missible for a swimmer to be completely sub-
breaststroke were essentially different strokes merged for a distance of not more than 15
that should have been separated long ago. The meters after the start and after each turn. By
truth is that the IOC had been too concerned that point, the head must have broken the
with its own priorities to consider, let alone surface. The swimmer must remain on the sur-
understand, the developmental needs of one face until the next turn or finish.”
particular stroke (Colwin 1998). The dolphin kick is much faster when swum
under the surface after the starting dive and
Development of the Dolphin Kick when pushing off from the wall after the turn.
This is because swimming below the disturbed
In 1935, Jack Sieg, a University of Iowa swim- surface water eliminates wave drag that consti-
mer, developed the skill of swimming on his tutes about 80 percent of the overall drag acting
side while moving his legs in unison similar to on the body. (Friction drag, the result of the
the action of a fish’s tail. He tried the same leg water being in contact with the body, is only
action while swimming face down on the sur- about 20 to 30 percent of the total drag acting on
face and eventually developed a perfectly timed the body when swimming.)

--- Page 48 Text ---
Chapter 2
Breakthroughs in
Stroke Techniques
Biomechanics refers to the applica-
tion of laws governing all forms of
human motion. These laws deal with
forces and their resultant motions.
The laws concerned with the mo-
tion of bodies are commonly divided
into two branches: kinematics and
kinetics. Kinematics involves aspects
of the motions of bodies, such as
speed, velocity, and acceleration,
without reference to what causes
them. Kinetics is concerned with the
effects that forces have on these mo-
tions.
During the second half of the 20th
century, the biomechanical research
conducted by James “Doc” Counsil-
man and Robert Schleihauf contrib-
uted to a better understanding of
human swimming propulsion, par-
ticularly to the changing interactions
between lift and drag forces, two
terms they introduced into the swim-
ming lexicon.
Counsilman showed why the
pull in all swimming strokes does
not follow a straight line (1969; 1971;
Counsilman and Brown 1970). Be-
fore Counsilman began his experi-
ments, many talented swimmers
naturally changed the direction of
the pull as the hand moved in a
curved path across the line of the
swimmer’s forward movement. A
detailed underwater photographic
study of the familiar curvilinear
pattern of the butterfly stroke
prompted Counsilman to question
33

--- Page 49 Text ---
34 Breakthrough Swimming
the validity of the prevailing concept (which
Counsilman himself advocated at the time) of
teaching swimmers to pull directly backward
in a straight line in order to go directly for-
ward. (This concept was in accordance with
Newton’s third law of motion: for every action
there is a reaction, equal and opposite.)
Schleihauf, by accurate measurement of hand
placements and use of vector analysis, showed Figure 2.2 Lift always acts in a direction
the range of propulsive forces developed in the perpendicular to the direction of motion.
four swimming styles (1974; 1977; 1979).
A propeller is like a wing in that it also
The Lift Principle
generates lift, but the lift, acting at right angles
to the blade’s motion, is directed forward (fig-
Formulated by the Swiss mathematician Daniel
ure 2.3).
Bernoulli (1700–1782), the law known as the
Bernoulli principle states that as the velocity of
a fluid increases, the pressure it exerts de-
creases.
When a stream of fluid passes around a
foil—such as a swimmer’s hand—the flow over
the convex upper surface has a greater velocity
and, following Bernoulli’s principle, a lower
pressure than that on the under surface; the
difference in pressure between the two streams
creates a force called lift (figure 2.1).
Figure 2.3 A propeller is like a wing and also
generates lift.
Counsilman’s presentation revealed that
when a swimmer’s hand moves in a curved-
line path across the line of the body’s forward
motion, it at times produces forward lift (fig-
ure 2.4).
Basically, the swimmer uses the resistance
caused by lift on the palm of the hand to apply
Figure 2.1 The difference in pressure between
thrust. The action can be likened to walking up
the low-pressure and high-pressure streams
a sandy slope, with every step up pushing the
creates a lift force.
sand down. Both examples obey Newton’s third
law of motion.
Lift, also known as side thrust, always acts in The action-reaction principle mentioned ear-
a direction perpendicular to the direction of lier in the description of the straight-line pull
motion. In the case of an airplane wing in level still applies, but when lift propulsion predomi-
flight, lift is directed upward at a right angle to nates in a swimming stroke, the reaction is
the direction of motion (figure 2.2). created by a different mechanism. Instead of

--- OCR from Page 49 Image 1 ---
c
?-

Low
pressure

itty »

—————————
———————————————————

High pressure

--- OCR from Page 49 Image 2 ---
Lift
force

Direction

of motion
c_| Drag
force

--- OCR from Page 49 Image 3 ---
Lift

Direction
of motion

--- Page 50 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 35
a
Figure 2.5 Lift propulsion is created by the
hand moving in a curvilinear path (underneath
view).
Adapted from Counsilman 1977.
b
Figure 2.4 A swimmer’s hand moves in a
curvilinear path to produce forward lift: (a) front
view and (b) side view.
Adapted from Counsilman 1977.
pushing directly backward in a straight line
with the palm of the hand, the hand moves in a
curved path, splitting the water with the edge
of the hand to create a pressure resistance on
the palm of the hand against which thrust is
applied (figure 2.5).
Counsilman’s findings suggested a different
approach to swimming efficiency in all the
strokes. The hand should not always be pulled
directly backward in a straight line (paddling)
but, at times, and in certain strokes, should
follow a curvilinear path (sculling), during
which the angle of the hand (pitch) relative to
the body’s forward motion should be continu-
ously adjusted to achieve the maximum lift
propulsion (figure 2.6).
In recent years, freeze-frame underwater
videography, taken with new robotic under- Figure 2.6 The pitch of the hand is continuously
water cameras, has thrown an interesting light adjusted to achieve maximum lift propulsion.
on the nature of a swimmer’s supposedly self- Adapted from Counsilman 1977.

--- Page 51 Text ---
36 Breakthrough Swimming
created sculling motions. These movement se- moving through a fluid, human swimming
quences were taken during actual racing con- propulsion results from neither lift nor drag
ditions, when swimmers were traveling at forces acting in isolation but rather from a
speed and applying arm leverage to develop constant interaction between the two during
maximum force. Instead of deliberately at- the changing sequences of a swimming stroke
tempting to use so-called sculling motions in a (1974; 1977; 1979).
conscious attempt to scull in a curvilinear path, Schleihauf created an exact plastic resin rep-
the sequences show that in the freestyle stroke, lica of a hand, which he dipped into a flow
lateral deviations from the intended direct channel through which fluid moved at a known
straight-back movements of the hands are speed. The hand was mounted on a rod that
caused naturally by the body’s rotation on its measured the total range of forces, both lift and
long axis. drag, produced by the hand in varying flow
conditions and at different angles of pitch
Interaction of Lift (Schleihauf 1977).
and Drag Forces
Lift Coefficient
It is difficult to understand why biomechanists Schleihauf then compared the lifting character-
have divided into separate camps concerning istics of the hand with the characteristics of a
the dominant use of either drag or lift force commonly used airfoil of similar profile (NACA
propulsion in swimming. Almost any elemen- airfoil 0012) and found that the hand’s maxi-
tary text on fluid dynamics will include within mum lift coefficient was 20 percent less than the
its first one or two pages a statement such as the wing’s. He attributed this minor difference to
following typical extract on the basic interac- the hand’s slightly more irregular shape.
tion between lift and drag forces: The term lift coefficient refers to the relation-
ship between the amount of lift on an airfoil
The force acting on a body moving through
and its angle of pitch. The lift component, or
a fluid is usually resolved into two com-
amount of lift on an airfoil or human hand,
ponents: one called lift normal to the di-
increases or decreases relative to the size of the
rection in the body, and the other called
angle of pitch. According to Schleihauf, the lift
drag, in a direction opposed to that of
coefficient on a swimmer’s hand increases up
motion (Karamcheti 1966).
to an angle of pitch (also known as angle of
Schleihauf, a swimming coach and also a attack) of about 40 degrees and then decreases
trained engineer, pointed out that like any body (figure 2.7; Schleihauf 1977).
Figure 2.7 Coefficient of lift curve. From Schleihauf 1977, p. 51. Adapted by permission.

--- OCR from Page 51 Image 1 ---
Wt JO JUaIOYjJo0D

g0°

75°

60°

Hand pitch

40°

o°

--- Page 52 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 37
Drag Coefficient Resultant Propulsive Force
Similarly, the term drag coefficient refers to the The next stage of Schleihauf’s studies involved
relationship between the drag component on an filming champion swimmers from directly be-
airfoil or hand and its angle of attack. The drag low and at right angles to their forward direc-
coefficient also increases or decreases in relation tion. Before filming, Schleihauf placed four small
to the size of the angle of attack. Schleihauf’s lights on each swimmer’s hands, which enabled
measurements show that the drag coefficient on Schleihauf to determine the hands’ paths as well
a swimmer’s hand increases as the angle of as their changing speeds and angles of attack in
attack increases to 90 degrees (Schleihauf 1977). all four styles of swimming. Schleihauf then
With a diminishing angle of attack, the drag combined the data collected from his film stud-
coefficient decreases. There is an almost equal ies of leading swimmers with the information
contribution of lift and drag forces at an angle of obtained in the fluid laboratory (Schleihauf 1977).
approximately 45 degrees, and drag forces pre-
By this method, Schleihauf determined the
dominate when the hand reaches angles greater
direction and magnitude of the lift and drag
than 45 degrees (figure 2.8).
forces created by the hands at key points in the
stroke. Using vector analysis of this information,
he estimated the instantaneous direction and
magnitude of the resultant propulsive force—
that is, the net effect of the interaction between
the lift and drag forces. Schleihauf then mea-
sured the resultant forces developed during the
stroke at selected angles of hand pitch (figure
2.9). His work set the scene for the first compre-
hensive analysis of stroke mechanics and has
a since been followed by several other studies.
Angle of Attack
The angle at which a body meets the flowstream,
or angle of attack, is a crucial factor. The angle
of attack has nothing to do with the horizontal
(parallel to the ground) angle but is instead the
angle at which the object meets the flowstream.
In the example of the thin plate (see figure 2.10),
we know that there is minimum flow resistance
b
when the plate is held with its edge to the
stream and maximum drag when held at a
right angle. But what happens when the lead-
ing edge is inclined at a slight angle?
The fluid pressure is now greater under-
neath the plate than on the top surface, a lifting
force, or side thrust, acting at right angles to the
oncoming flowstream. But whenever lift is gen-
erated, drag is also created. Drag acts in the
c
direction opposite to the motion of the object.
Figure 2.8 Lift-drag interaction: (a) less than 45 Whereas lift acts at right angles to the
degrees; (b) 45 degrees; (c) greater than 45 flowstream, drag acts parallel to the flowstream.
degrees. From Schleihauf 1977, p. 53. Adapted by The net result is that the total force on the plate
permission. is backward as well as upward (figure 2.11).

--- OCR from Page 52 Image 1 ---
Flow

Lift

Drag

--- OCR from Page 52 Image 2 ---
Lift

Drag

FIOW =

--- OCR from Page 52 Image 3 ---
Flow

Lift

Drag

--- Page 53 Text ---
38 Breakthrough Swimming
a
Figure 2.11 Lift and drag forces act on a thin
plate inclined at an angle of attack.
Important Contributions
of Biomechanic Research
Ernest Maglischo (1983) used three-dimensional
motion picture photography and digitizing
b
techniques to show distinct periods of accelera-
tion and deceleration of forward speed during
a stroke cycle. Maglischo posed the important
question: “When are these periods of decelera-
tion normal, and when do they indicate stroke
defects?”
Following Maglischo’s study, David Costill
(1987) conceived a video-computer system that
provided instant analysis of a swimmer’s ve-
c
locity at different points in the stroke. The
system combines the use of a video camera
Figure 2.9 Resultant force production: (a) pitch
with the swim meter invented by Albert Craig
equals 20 degrees, velocity equals 12.0 fps;
and David Pendergast (1979). (The mechanical
(b) pitch equals 45 degrees, velocity equals 11.2
parts of the swim meter were designed and
fps; (c) pitch equals 90 degrees, velocity equals
built by Gerald F. Harris.) A computer syn-
10.0 fps. From Schleihauf 1977, p. 53. Adapted by
chronizes the video image with a velocity graph
permission.
and superimposes the two on a video display.
This information eventually may help swim-
mers time their strokes with greater accuracy,
particularly when they know the relationship
between the propulsive forces they develop
and the fluctuating velocities within the stroke
cycle. At present, we remain in comparative
ignorance about this important practical as-
pect of swimming propulsion. The continuing
challenge will be to reduce often complex sci-
entific information to a simple, easily taught
format.
Figure 2.10 Thin plate inclined to the flowstream Further complicating the new perspective
to form an angle of attack. was the realization that not only does the hand

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 3 ---
Resultant force
Lift R= 24 Ib

Drag

Clow

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 4 ---
Flow

Lift

Resultant force
R = 24 Ib

Drag

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 5 ---
. Resultant force
Lit Ba lb

Drag

Flow

--- Page 54 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 39
propel by moving in a curvilinear path but that minimize resistance. By rotating the body to
this path is three-dimensional (figure 2.12). The each side within the natural rhythm of the
hand moves simultaneously in three dimen- stroke, smaller changes in the curvature of the
sions—the lateral, vertical, and horizontal flow lines result. In butterfly and breaststroke,
planes. the momentary submerging of the body be-
neath the surface greatly reduces surface wave
drag.
Form drag (or skin friction) is caused by
water resistance on the swimmer’s skin, a resis-
tance generally considered to have little nega-
x tive effect on propulsion. However, the prac-
Lateral t
b
i
e
c
e
e
n
o
s
f
h
sh
ow
av
n
in
to
g
e
b
n
o
h
d
a
y
n
h
ce
a i
s
r
w
(“
im
sh
m
av
in
in
g
g
s p
d
e
o
e
w
d
n
(S
”
h
) h
ar
a
p
s
Horizontal y and Costill 1989).
Eddy resistance or separation (also known
as tail suction) is caused by water pressure at a
given region insufficient to force the water
laterally inward and make it follow closely
along the body, especially toward the body’s
tapering aft end. Water is dragged in from
behind the swimmer to fill the gap left because
the flow has not closed in from the sides. Resis-
z
tance is generated by the forward acceleration
of water that otherwise would flow backward
and be left behind.
Prolonged Momentum
Some swimmers naturally prolong their mo-
mentum past the point where it would nor-
mally start to diminish. A stroke cycle well
coordinated with each propulsive impulse
occurring in ideal sequence can avoid ex-
treme fluctuations of acceleration and decel-
eration. The more constant the momentum,
the better the index of efficient technique
(Colwin 1984b).
The ability to prolong momentum allows a
swimmer to take fewer strokes to cover a set
distance, an indication of proficiency. Measure-
ment against a grid shows that a skilled crawl
swimmer is able to complete a swimming stroke
with the hand leaving the water ahead of the
point at which it entered (Schleihauf 1977). At
first, this phenomenon was thought to result
from lift force causing the hand to move for-
ward as it stroked. However, the real reason is
that, as one hand enters the water, the body is
propelled forward by the other hand. In
Vertical
Figure 2.12 The three-dimensional aspect (x, y,
z axes) of the pull. From Schleihauf 1977, p. 50.
Adapted by permission.
Counsilman and Wasilak (1982), studying
hand speed and hand-acceleration patterns in
swimming strokes, found that the hand fol-
lows a velocity pattern in which the three-
dimensional speed continuously increases ex-
cept for a deceleration point in midstroke, a
finding that confirms Schleihauf’s study
(1974).
The main impediments to a swimmer’s for-
ward motion are frontal resistance, form drag,
and eddy resistance. Frontal resistance is caused
by wave-making drag. The swimmer’s for-
ward momentum causes a buildup of moving
pressure disturbances in the water in front of
the body, which results in frontal resistance.
Lifting the head and shoulders too far from the
horizontal plane lowers the hips and legs to set
up increased frontal resistance.
In freestyle and backstroke, the strokes in
which the body rolls or rotates on its long axis,
the use of gradually curved surfaces along the
general paths followed by the water flow will

--- OCR from Page 54 Image 1 ---
Horizontal

jeaan

--- Page 55 Text ---
40 Breakthrough Swimming
figure 2.13, the right arm enters in a stream- Kinetic Streamlining
lined posture that permits water to flow under
the arm and torso, enabling the body to pro- Kinetic streamlining refers to the synchroniza-
long the momentum developed by the left arm tion of body and limb alignments aimed at
as it accelerates through its pull. reducing drag during the impulses of force and
Other factors also result in prolonged mo- the resulting propulsion (Colwin 1984b). Most
mentum, such as having a streamlined and competent swimmers naturally assume stream-
buoyant body and having the ability to acceler- lined body alignments. However, the presence
ate the arm stroke to overcome resistance drag of bilateral body alignments in the crawl and
(Colwin 1984b). backstroke, for example, will not necessarily
result in prolonged momentum. The timing of
the changing alignment sequences is the key
factor.
E When the body rotates on its long axis in
freestyle and backstroke, the water flows
smoothly around the body with reduced
changes to the curvature of the flow lines. The
rotation lowers resistance because the rotating
action results in a smaller surface area of the
body being presented to the water. To maxi-
E mize this effect in crawl and backstroke, a
skilled swimmer spends most of the stroke
cycle with the body tipped equally to one side
or the other rather than in the flat, central
posture that produces increased resistance.
E Transitional Phases
of the Swimming Strokes
The body roll on its long axis in freestyle and
backstroke results from the rotation of the arms
E
as they alternately pull and recover over the
water. The entire body—shoulders, hips, and
legs—rotates at once. The total amount of roll
varies from 70 to 90 degrees, or 35 to 45 degrees
on each side of the body’s long axis, in both the
X < > E freestyle and backstroke.
Figure 2.13 Skilled swimmers prolong The direction and speed of the body’s rota-
momentum by accurately timing their arm strokes tion is controlled by the arms throughout the
and streamlining their body alignments throughout stroke cycle rather than by the swimmer con-
stroke sequence. Observing the entry (E) and exit sciously rotating the hips from side to side,
(X) points of a swimmer against a poolside grid using the so-called core muscles. (Core swim-
creates a visual impression of the swimmer’s ming was a popular catchphrase in the late 20th
stroking efficiency. If a swimmer’s hand exits the century, used mainly by purveyors of expen-
water at the same point where it entered, it shows sive exercise equipment designed to strengthen
that there has been no “slip” in the stroke. As the large muscles of the trunk.) During each
shown here, highly skilled swimmers exit their arm recovery, the shifting mass of the shoulder
hands ahead of the entry point, the distance and upper arm causes the body to roll gradu-
between “X” and “E” indicating the extent to which ally to the other side. The directional change of
they are able to prolong momentum. This indicates
their ability to swim with fewer strokes per lap.

--- Page 56 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 41
the body roll is synchronized with the other For freestyle, Johnson timed the stroke from
arm as it starts its pull. This transition from the the right-hand entry through at least two stroke
end of one stroke to the start of the next is cycles to the next right-hand entry, obtaining the
critical to maintain momentum. It requires tempo by halving the time for two cycles. Johnson
smooth streamlining of changing body align- said that in freestyle a typical tempo for a middle-
ments and split-second timing of one arm with distance collegiate swimmer is around 1.30 to
the other to ensure the swimmer’s prolonged 1.35 seconds. For a good college male sprinter, a
momentum. typical tempo is around .95 second, and female
Some swimmers, because of their physical swimmers at the elite level are approximately
characteristics, are unable to roll quickly enough .05 second faster than men per stroke cycle.
to synchronize the body rotation with the arm Backstroke tempo, on the other hand, is
action. It is likely that each swimmer has an slower than freestyle by about .2 to .3 second
individual “rolling time,” the time taken for the per stroke revolution. Johnson said that
total of roll from one side to the other. This backstrokers take about the same number of
might be related to height, the average width of strokes per length as freestylers do, but because
the body, buoyancy, and so on. of the more limited mechanics of the stroke,
Usually, swimmers who are broad and stocky backstrokers cannot stroke as quickly.
have a slow rolling time from one side to the Johnson suggested two ways for measuring
other. Conversely, tall, light-boned, and buoy- breaststroke tempo. First, measure from the
ant female swimmers are able to roll quickly, time the feet close until they close again in one
thus avoiding excessive resistance by not stay- stroke cycle. Second, measure from when the
ing too long in the central position. chin breaks the surface as the swimmer breathes
until the next time the chin breaks the water. He
Stroke Length and Stroke said that breaststroke swimmers on average
Frequency stroke about .10 to .15 second faster than
freestylers of similar expertise.
Stroke length (distance per stroke) and stroke In butterfly, the stroke is measured from the
frequency (stroke rate) govern a swimmer’s time the hands enter the water until they enter
average speed. Should a swimmer use long, again for the next stroke. Johnson said that the
slow strokes or short, fast strokes? Actually, stroke revolutions in butterfly are similar to
skilled swimmers tend to use long, fast strokes. freestyle. A good collegiate male 100-yard but-
When they increase their speed, better swim- terfly swimmer is typically in the 1.05- to 1.15-
mers usually try to take even longer strokes second range, whereas females in the same
and turn over the longer stroke more quickly. category vary between 1.00 and 1.05 seconds.
Though the concept of taking long strokes is With the exception of those swimming the
not a new idea, it took hold only gradually. butterfly stroke, skilled swimmers usually in-
Most competitors in the early years of the sport crease their stroke length as the distance of the
thought speed was to be achieved by fast and race increases. However, probably because of
furious stroking. However, Louis de B. Handley the accumulative effects of fatigue, a swimmer’s
(1928), one of the pioneers of women’s com- stroke frequency may decrease, and so will
petitive swimming and a prolific writer on average speed (Pai, Hay, and Wilson 1984; Craig
aquatic subjects, observed that a swift stroke is and Pendergast 1979; Craig et al. 1985).
not conducive to fast swimming. Researchers report no consistent pattern re-
Ron Johnson (1982) delivered an address on garding stroke frequency during a swimming
tempo awareness training at the American Swim- race. Stroke frequency may often remain con-
ming Coaches’ Association’s World Clinic, in stant throughout a race, or it may either de-
which he outlined methods for timing stroke crease or increase (Craig et al. 1985; Curry 1975;
tempo with a 1/100-second stopwatch or a com- Hay, Guimaraes, and Grimston 1983; Pai, Hay,
puter that depended on the stroke being swum. and Wilson 1984).

--- Page 57 Text ---
42 Breakthrough Swimming
Researchers agree, however, that stroke How does the use of the principle of mo-
length rather than stroke frequency is the deter- mentum influence the efficiency of the overall
mining factor in a swimmer’s average speed. swimming stroke? Momentum affects the
They also agree that in freestyle, butterfly, and amount of power the swimmer must apply to
breaststroke, stroke frequency is very similar. keep moving forward with a minimum of
However, probably because of the mechanical body deceleration. For example, when a
disadvantage of the body in the dorsal posi- freestyle swimmer smacks the surface water
tion, backstroke usually has a much slower with the arm at the entry, or starts the pull too
stroke frequency and greater stroke length than powerfully before the other hand has finished
the other strokes. the power phase of its stroke, the momentum
Male swimmers attain greater speed than created by the opposite arm is severely re-
female swimmers because they swim with a duced. To overcome the inertia caused by poor
greater stroke length. However, the two sexes timing of the arms, a greater amount of effort
have very similar stroke frequencies (Craig and must be applied to maintain the swimmer’s
Pendergast 1979; East 1970; Pai, Hay, and Wil- momentum.
son 1984).
Skill
Olympic Stars Break Through
Skill is that element of performance that en-
to a New Paradigm
ables the swimmer to accomplish a large amount
of work with a relatively small amount of ef-
At the 2000 Sydney Olympics, the advanced
fort. Put the other way around, performance
swimming styles of freestyle champions Pieter
accomplished with the least waste of effort
van den Hoogenband, Ian Thorpe, Gary Hall Jr.,
produces the highest standard of skill.
and Alexander Popov were seen as a break-
Visible effort is a sign of unproductive effort,
through to a new paradigm of stroke mechanics.
and poor performance is usually characterized
Based on the skilled use of the principle of
by the type of wasteful muscular activity de-
momentum, their easy gliding action drew
scribed previously—using forceful motions
much attention and comment. These four ath-
when only light ones are required.
letes showed the world of swimming that accu-
Swimming skill is acquired mainly through
rate timing and efficient streamlining produces
a refined coordination of the various major
momentum in the most efficient way to over-
elements of the overall swimming action. The
come resistance.
motor impulses from the central nervous sys-
Accurate Timing and Momentum tem arrive at the muscles in such numbers and
with such split-second timing as to result in a
The naturally accurate timing of the freestyle
correct sequence of integrated propulsive and
champions’ arm movements and their con-
streamlining movements.
stantly changing body alignments produced a
The principles involved include the follow-
continuous momentum and a steady, effortless
ing:
application of power. The uncanny subtlety of
their strokes was in marked contrast to most of • Momentum should be employed to over-
the other swimmers, who often seemed to exert come resistance.
too much energy by powering their way
• Work arranged to permit an easy and
through the water.
natural rhythm—correct timing—is con-
The techniques of the first Olympic champi-
ducive to smooth and automatic perfor-
ons of the new millennium were a complete
mance.
breakout from the previously dominant frame-
work of the specious lift versus drag argu- • Hesitation or the temporary and often
ments, pursued with pedantic obsession for 30 cessation of motion should be eliminated
years. from the performance.

--- Page 58 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 43
Subtle Differences These measurements can quickly highlight
Among Individuals the differences among swimmers, particularly
between average and elite swimmers. When
The tall, lean swimmer appears to have the biomechanists report studies said to measure
advantage of being able to apply force against the forces developed by the model of an elite
the resistance of the water through a greater swimmer’s hand in a moving flow, no refer-
range of movement. Today’s top male swim- ence is made to the size and area of the hand of
mers are rarely under 6 feet 2 inches tall, while the swimmer or whose hand it is.
most of the top female swimmers stand 5 feet 8 A large difference in propulsion can result
inches or taller. from only a small increase in surface area. A
Swimmers vary in mechanical adaptability, good example of this is the difference measured
including flexibility; the surface area of their when a swimmer uses a hand paddle versus
propelling members; the entire body surface when he does not. Sometimes a swimmer with
area related to resistance; the floating ability of a small hand finds it difficult to effectively use
the body; and the power of the propelling a direct backward pull and has to use a more
factors such as the leverage developed by the transverse sculling action to propel. When the
arms and the thrust or balance provided by the same swimmer wears a hand paddle, which
legs. applies a few more square inches against the
Similarly, body proportions; height; armspan resistance of the water, he finds the direct back-
relative to height; shoulder width; hip width; ward paddling action much easier.
the length, shape, and girth of the torso; and Next time you see Thorpe or Hackett grip-
even the shape of the head determine the type ping the water at the start of the stroke with a
of surface wave a swimmer will make in the hooked wrist and a hand planed directly back-
water, as well as the amount of skin-water fric- ward, note the size of their hands. It will be
tion presented below the surface line. Equally clear why this technique is better suited to a
important are the relative dimensions of vari- swimmer blessed with super-sized hands that
ous parts of the swimmer’s body—particularly present at least 30 square inches of propelling
limbs and extremities—to the whole physique, surface to the water with each stroke.
as these vary as widely as physical contours. Despite variations in individual strengths
Theoretically, a strong, lean, tall swimmer and weaknesses, unlike yachts of different de-
with good buoyancy has the best body type for sign, differently designed swimmers compete
speed swimming. On the other hand, squarely in the same race and not in races designated for
built female swimmers of average height who people of particular physical characteristics. In
do not glide well but are unusually buoyant are each of the eight lanes will be a swimmer with
often able to develop great speed with a high- basically two arm propellers and two leg pro-
revving, continuous arm stroke, particularly pellers. Each set of propellers varies in design
over longer distances. regarding length, shape, and surface area; con-
sequently, each swimmer will use slightly dif-
Hand Size and Surface Area
ferent propelling mechanisms.
The importance of hand size and hand surface Need for Descriptive Research
area has been overlooked in considering the
efficiency of various types of stroke patterns. We will never be able to design more efficient
The wide range of hand sizes and surface areas swimmers (in the way that racing yachts are
in different swimmers also has not been con- made to measure by naval architects), but it‘s
sidered. These differences can be easily mea- reasonable to assume that better methods of
sured by drawing the outline of each swimmer’s talent selection that measure all the complex
hand on graph paper then measuring the total physical and mechanical attributes that con-
surface area by counting the number of squares tribute to speed will one day become possible.
within the outline of the hand. These measurements may include mathemati-

--- Page 59 Text ---
44 Breakthrough Swimming
cally constructing a prototype of the ideal swim- swimmer’s body and is diverted sideways be-
ming physique—perhaps by measuring up fore it reaches the hip bones.
swimmers such as Van Hoogenband, Thorpe, An important point is that water pressure
Hall, and Popov, for example—to develop a wants to go from high-pressure areas to low-
model of ideal composite factors. pressure areas and, as a result, can’t suddenly
change direction. This fact is not appreciated
Stroke Mechanics by some theorists who draw fanciful lines along
a swimmer’s contours to indicate that the flow
Swimmers have the choice of using the hands strictly observes these particular shapes. To the
and forearms predominantly as paddles or as contrary, a flow approaching a submerged
foils. Different limb shapes and sizes affect the shoulder, for example, will not go right along to
mechanics used by each swimmer in applying the shoulder to follow its particular contour
propulsive leverage on the water. In the water, but will start changing its direction well before
swimmers often look different from each other it arrives at the shoulder.
even while employing the same basic funda- It can be seen that a surface ship faces a
mentals of propulsion. practical speed limit, called its hull speed. Once
Buoyancy and balance, the split-second tim- past its hull speed, the ship’s drag increases
ing between each arm, and the continuously suddenly and severely. Since hull speed de-
changing body alignments throughout the pends on hull length, a larger ship can go faster
stroke are contributing factors that enable a before hitting that limit. (Generally, this is called
swimmer to produce continuing momentum the limiting Froude number.) Basically, the
throughout the stroke. speed at which any boat can move is equal to
the speed at which a wave, whose length is
Wave-Making Resistance equal to the length of that boat, travels. This can
be calculated as a function of water depth and
Applied to Human Swimming
wave length. For all displacement craft, this
limit is hard to exceed. It can be exceeded
In 1969, in a discussion of power-weight ratio
slightly but not by much, as doing so would
and streamlining, it was said:
require a large increase in power.
Despite the stated disadvantages that face
The effects of a swimmer’s shape and
human swimmers, athletes such as Misty
physical proportions on reducing resis-
Hyman, David Berkoff, and Daichi Suzuki,
tance is largely governed by certain fac-
with their dolphin-kicking, underwater tech-
tors. The ratio of height to width is prob-
niques, have come closest to achieving some
ably the most important single factor in
semblance of a perfect streamlining system for
reducing resistance. The more slender the
human swimmers. Olympic butterfly cham-
swimmer, the less will be the underwater
pion Misty Hyman in particular, using her
volume compared to his height or length
novel fish-tail technique while lying on her
in the water. If he has a gradually tapering
side underwater with arms extended forward,
physique, this will allow water to flow
creates pressure waves that increase in ampli-
past more easily. (Colwin 1969, pp. 88–89)
tude as they move aft, using her whole body as
Vast differences exist between human swim- an integrated propulsive unit.
mers and ships specially designed to displace
water efficiently, so comparisons of the two are Problems in Human Swimming
not always applicable. For one thing, a ship’s
bow cleanly parts the waters and keeps the The alternate kick of crawl and backstroke
resulting wave closely encased around the hull, swimming prevents the flow of water from
whereas a human swimmer diverts the flow closing around the swimmer and leaving a
sideways, both at the bow wave created by the smooth wake. The kick and recovery move-
head and with the transverse flow created at ment of the breaststroke leg action has the same
the hips. Some water does flow under the effect. However, the butterfly leg action, in

--- Page 60 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 45
direct contrast to the other strokes, is the only Each entry of the arms in freestyle and but-
leg action that permits the flow to close around terfly causes a repetitive, abrupt splitting of the
the swimmer’s aft end. bow wave. We don’t know what effect this has
Rolling the body on its long axis in freestyle on keeping a smooth wave-flow encased around
and backstroke causes transverse flows to form the body. In freestyle, this splitting or deforma-
against a swimmer’s line of forward progres- tion of the bow wave occurs as the body rolls to
sion. These transverse flows disturb the main the side of the entry arm. Not only is the bow
flow trying to move aftward. However, the wave broken with each arm entry, but water
more buoyant female swimmer appears able to often is thrown vigorously forward as the arms
roll the body without disrupting rearward wave come over to start each new stroke. This effect
flow, probably because she displaces less water is more pronounced in male swimmers than in
than her male counterpart does. females.
Biomechanists tend to be most concerned The question is whether the speed of the
with measuring the resistance presented by a entry arm should be faster or slower than the
swimmer’s surface area and sometimes ignore speed of the body to effect a more controlled
the important effect of shape in maintaining entry and preserve the momentum of the body.
streamlining. But a principle of hydrodynam- It is possible that even the shape of a
ics is that gradually curved surfaces along the swimmer’s head may influence the shape of
general paths followed by the water flow will the bow wave produced. Some swimmers have
minimize resistance. round-shaped heads (bracycephalic), and oth-
Hydrodynamicists say that swimmers, es- ers have long heads (dolicocephalic). A round
pecially when moving at speed, present more head may cause a bow wave that is more
form drag than friction drag. Resistance presented rounded in front, while a swimmer with a head
against the surface water in wave making is of narrower width may produce a bow wave
approximately 70 percent, whereas the amount with a sharper front.
of skin friction against water accounts for about Female swimmers because of generally
30 percent of resistance. The rough surface smaller body size, greater buoyancy, and more
presented is very much like a ship hindered by rounded contours, produce narrower and
a bunch of protuberances (referring to the knees, smaller bow waves than their more angular
ankle joints, hip bones, and changing muscle male counterparts, but they still in no way split
shapes) extending from its hull that set up the water in the manner of a ship’s bow.
numerous pressure waves radiating from it. Observation of the flow patterns developed
The motion of the body as the arms pull and in the various strokes indicates a smoother
recover, together with trunk rotation, creates flow around the body in the backstroke, prob-
lateral pressure disturbances, waves, vortices, ably due to the more gradual curvature of the
and general turbulence. In addition, the break- back compared with the more irregular shape
ing up of the flow caused by the leg actions in of the front trunk. In addition, there appears to
three of the racing styles prevents the flow from be less interference with the bow wave at each
closing behind the swimmer. arm entry. This may be caused by the shallower
In the freestyle and backstroke, a bow wave entry of the arm and a more careful control of
forms around the head. Contrary to descrip- the arm as the hand enters the water.
tions in some of the swimming literature, flow
is not deflected in two directions in a sharp V- Tall Swimmers and Wave Making
shape, as around the bow of a ship. The first
part of the body to meet the oncoming flow is Most swimmers lengthen the bow wave as they
the top of the head, not the shoulders, which increase their speed. This is particularly notice-
are sometimes described as helping the body able in tall swimmers such as Popov (6 feet
penetrate the water. The bow wave is rounded 7 inches), Thorpe (6 feet 5 inches), Hall (6 feet
by the shape of the head and forms a divergent 6 inches), and van den Hoogenband (6 feet
arc-shaped—not V-shaped—flow that spreads 4 inches). Each swimmer creates one long, close-
out wider than the shoulders. fitting wave along the length of his body.

--- Page 61 Text ---
46 Breakthrough Swimming
Any object moving through surface water body’s total movement, consisting of a com-
generates waves. At low speeds, the object plex set of continuous and interacting sequen-
generates very short waves, but with in- tial actions. In the short term, an academic
creasing speed the object creates a pair of analysis of the forces acting on a single arm at
waves separated by roughly its own wa- a particular instant in which the hand is frozen
terline length—the so-called bow wave in the water will not lead to real advances
and stern wave. The waterline length (hull because the arm is never rigid but moves
length) thus sets the distance between continuously.
waves (wavelength). Waves always move, The argument over whether swimmers
and their wave lengths set their speeds. should use predominant lift or predominant
The waves get longer and longer the faster drag propulsion has become a drawn-out, spe-
the object goes, until eventually reaching cious, academic argument that long ago en-
the point where the wave equals the length tered a cul-de-sac. Among practical and suc-
of the object, more or less. It has a crest at cessful pool deck coaches, the lift-drag
the bow and another one near the stern. argument became a nonissue long ago, if in fact
Trouble arises because an ordinary float- it ever existed. If biomechanists have had to
ing ship finds it hard to go faster than its perform scientific experiments to determine if
waves. As has been known for at least a swimmers use predominant lift or drag forces,
century, wave speed increases with the how much more difficult is it for the coach
square root of wavelength; double the practitioner to readily determine these factors
wavelength, and you increase the wave from the pool deck?
speed about 1.4 times. By making waves Furthermore, how is the coach to teach the
of longer length, the bigger boat makes desired stroke pattern and know with certainty
waves that travel faster. If the boat tries to that it has been established? How will the coach
go faster, a hill of water faces it, and the know which mechanism is best suited to the
boat must either cut its way through or go individual swimmer? And, as Stix and Fischetti
perpetually uphill—up the down escala- ask in Scientific American (2000), “Does it mat-
tor as it were (Vogel 1998). ter?” Surely it is enough for a swimmer to
develop the most efficient propulsive leverage
Videotaping swimmers of all levels of ability
on the water based on what flows naturally
in all strokes and of different body types at
from individual physical characteristics with-
varying rates of speed is a valuable, interesting,
out considering whether lift or drag forces
and thought-provoking exercise. These record-
predominate. There is a difference between
ings should be made from all angles, including
faulty technique and idiosyncrasy, and in this
high above the swimmers from a diving tower
process the coach should not start out with any
or similar height, as well as at the waterline to
particular idea of what specific type of tech-
determine wave height.
nique a swimmer should use, thereby trying to
force all swimmers into a Procrustean bed of
Exerting Natural Leverage uniformity.
During a long experience in coaching, I have
As stated earlier, much discussion has taken seen only one freestyle swimmer whose strok-
place over the years about whether swimmers ing pattern exactly duplicated that of another
should use predominant lift or predominant swimmer. Each swimmer is born with an indi-
drag mechanisms in their arm strokes. vidual neuromuscular pattern, and there is not
Biomechanists often present an idealized much a coach can do to change it. Experienced
case analysis of the hand and the arm of an coaches find that the most significant advances
individual swimmer that does not consider are made through intuition—either the natu-
the entire picture of a swimmer’s limb being ral feel of the swimmer or the intuition of a
connected to a body. The limb’s movement is skilled coach, prompting each swimmer into
not done in isolation. It is connected to the his or her natural movement inclination.

--- Page 62 Text ---
Breakthroughs in Stroke Techniques 47
Applying Effective Propulsive while noting at the same time that improved
force application on the water has resulted.
Leverage
Freestyle swimmers find that wearing a
weight belt has a positive effect on their ability
Differences in individual physique affect the
to place the stroke exactly where the strongest
way each swimmer applies leverage against
leverage results. The freestyle swimmer auto-
the water’s resistance. So how should a coach
matically adjusts the entry point of the hands to
instruct a swimmer on the ideal placement of
a position where he or she naturally feels the
the hand through the changing sequences of a
strongest resistance of the water during the
swimming stroke?
pull, even after the weight belt is removed.
The phrase “changing sequence” is used in
The coach should concentrate on teaching
contrast to a biomechanical analysis of a single
stroke mechanics based on the efficient use of
arm position that will not help to establish the
the major muscle groups involved. In all the
most effective moving stroke pattern for the
strokes except breaststroke, the swimmer pulls
individual swimmer.
the body forward over the hands and then, in
As a coach, I discovered, quite by accident,
smooth transition, pushes the body forward
that by wearing a weight belt most swimmers
past the hands. During the pull-push action,
will automatically exert maximum leverage on
the arm is pulled down and back by three main
the water and, in the process, find the stroke
muscle groups: pectoralis major, latissimus
pattern best suited to his or her own body build
dorsi, and teres major.
or, to phrase it colloquially, his or her own
Two key arm postures are common to all the
individual set of levers.
strokes (figure 2.14):
Practicing the stroke while wearing a weight
belt works well in all four styles of swimming. 1. the high elbow position during the ini-
A breaststroke swimmer, for example, who pulls tial pulling phase of the stroke; and
or kicks too wide will naturally groove both the
2. the adduction of the upper arm or arms
arm stroke and leg kick into a narrower action,
during the second phase of the stroke.
Figure 2.14 Two arm postures are common to all strokes. The left column shows the pull phase, and
the right column shows the push phase.

--- Page 63 Text ---
48 Breakthrough Swimming
In the pull phase of all the strokes (shown in T e
re
the left column of figure 2.14), the upper arm is s
m
medially rotated, and the elbow is flexed so a
jo
r
that the arm assumes an elbow-up position.
This action also occurs in the backstroke, but
upside-down. During the pull phase, the arm is
kept elbow-up to provide the most efficient
application of power. A simple way to achieve
this high elbow position is to keep the armpit
open and point the elbow out to the side. This
action will increase the power the swimmer is
able to exert during the pull.
In freestyle, butterfly, and breaststroke, the
second phase of the stroke, the push phase, is
marked by the powerful adduction of the upper
arm (drawing the upper arm toward the side of
the body; see the right column of figure 2.14). In
breaststroke, however, once the arms are ad-
ducted they are moved forward to full extension
in front of the body. Adduction, the act of moving
the arm to the side, is one of the most powerful
actions of the arm, involving some of the largest
muscles of the trunk. The principle part is played
by the latissimus dorsi and pectoralis major
muscles (figure 2.15). From its wide attachment
to the pelvis, spine, and ribs, the latissimus dorsi
acts on all the joints concerned. The pectoralis
major acts from the anterior chest wall while the
movement of the scapular is assisted by the
rhomboid and levator scapulae muscles.
Swimmers should pay particular attention
to strengthening the muscle groups respon-
sible for the movement of the arms in the shoul-
Latissimus
dorsi
Pectoralis
major
Figure 2.15 The three major muscle groups
involved in the pull-push action of a swimming
stroke.
der joint, specifically, the muscles that originate
in the shoulder and insert into the upper arm,
the muscles that originate on the trunk and
insert on the shoulder blade, and the muscles
that originate on the trunk and insert on the
arms. A wide range of exercise routines exist for
this purpose, for example, Nautilus and uni-
versal machine work, exercises that use stretch
cords (either in or out of the water), weight
training, free exercises, medicine ball training,
rope climbing, chin-ups, or exercises on a swim
bench.

--- Page 64 Text ---
Chapter 3
Strokes, Starts,
and Turns
Long before the invention of under-
water observation facilities, early
attempts to view underwater ac-
tion were made difficult by dirty or
muddy water and the fact that the
observer was usually standing next
to a river, lake, or canal.
Starting with the earliest books
on swimming until the mid-19th
century, stroke descriptions in swim-
ming books were accompanied by
line drawings made without the aid
of underwater observation. These
drawings and descriptions pur-
ported to show how swimming tech-
niques should be performed, but, in
reality, they were almost always
based on the writer’s subjective
opinion of what the stroke should
look like. Sometimes, probably to
impress the reader, the drawings
were annotated with comments that
said “drawn from life” or “taken
from life.”
In the late 19th century, these line
drawings were replaced by photo-
graphs. The Badminton Book of Swim-
ming (1885) by Sinclair and Henry
49

--- Page 65 Text ---
50 Breakthrough Swimming
was the first swimming book to contain photo- Swimming, which shows underwater still pho-
graphs, followed by Swimming by Ralph Tho- tographs of the techniques of mid-20th century
mas in 1904. Swimming and Watermanship (1918) world champions from Australia.
by L. de B. Handley had still photographs Over a 40-year period, James “Doc” Counsil-
showing swimmers demonstrating sequences man of Indiana University filmed the under-
of the swimming strokes while perched on water techniques of most of the world’s lead-
rocky ledges or banked-up beach sand. ing swimmers. Counsilman used flashing lights
Motion picture sequences were used for the attached to the swimmer’s hands to accurately
first time in The Outline of Swimming (1924) by measure the three-dimensional path of the
William Bachrach. Bachrach’s book contained swimming strokes, an important turning point
abovewater motion picture sequences of his in understanding swimming techniques.
star pupil, the great Johnny Weissmuller, the Counsilman designed a grid system on the
first motion picture sequences to appear in a wall of the pool as a reference for stroke analy-
swimming book. The Science of Swimming (1928) sis and invented a “roll-around” method for
by Frank J. Sullivan, swimming instructor at filming swimmers from directly below. He pro-
Princeton University, was the second book to duced several instructional films of high artis-
contain motion film sequences (also of tic standard. In 1977 Counsilman privately
Weissmuller). Swimming the American Crawl published the Competitive Swimming Manual,
(1930) by Johnny Weissmuller was the third which contained a section on stroke techniques
book showing movie picture frames of swim- that preserves the most complete and outstand-
ming technique, with Weissmuller demonstrat- ing collection of photographic studies of cham-
ing the crawl. pion swimmers ever published.
A Quick Way to Better Swimming (1939) by
Steve Forsyth, with photography by Moffat The Technique
Studios and Mort Walton, marked the first time
of the Crawl Stroke
that underwater motion picture sequence
frames of the swimming strokes appeared in a
The 20th century saw the invention of a com-
swimming book. Competitive Swimming and
pletely new form of human locomotion in the
Diving (1942) by David A. Armbruster featured
development of the crawl stroke. The smooth,
expert drawings by Lee Allen, a medical illus-
flowing action of the crawl is a far cry from the
trator at the University of Iowa hospital, copied
almost painful efforts of the pioneers and a
from underwater motion films by Lee W.
tribute to human ingenuity. The style is charac-
Cochran, supervisor of visual instruction at the
terized by split-second timing of the arms and
University of Iowa. This work records swim-
smooth transitions from one phase of the stroke
ming techniques as they existed in the 1940s.
to the next. Throughout the changing sequences
Basic Swimming (1951) by Yale University
of the stroke, the body assumes streamlined
coach Robert J.H. Kiphuth and his longtime
alignments that reduce resistance and prolong
assistant Harry M. Burke includes strokes,
the momentum developed by each successive
starts, and turns filmed by Grantland Rice Sports
stroke.
Pictures Corporation. The book includes Jam
Handy’s historic 61-frame stroboscopic under- Side View
water sequence of the great Japanese swimmer,
Hironoshin Furuhashi. Split-second timing is shown during the transi-
The Technique of Competitive Swimming (1956) tion phase of the arm stroke (figure 3.1a). The
by Bela Rajki of Hungary contains the first upper arms form an approximately 45-degree
detailed underwater sequences of leading Eu- angle to each other as the left arm enters the
ropean swimmers. The sequences of the butter- water. The elbow-up position of the right arm
fly dolphin stroke are a valuable historical places the hand at an efficient angle to push the
record of this stroke’s early development. In water backward as the arm begins the power
1963 Forbes Carlile published Forbes Carlile on phase of the stroke.

--- Page 66 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 51
Note the marked acceleration of the right
arm in comparison to the slower left arm, now
completely entered into the water (figure 3.1b).
a
The left arm’s slower movement helps retain
the body’s momentum. The left arm and shoul-
der gradually extend forward in a movement
that will eventually tip the body onto its left
side. The right angle formed by the arms at this
b
stage indicates accurate stroke timing of one
arm with the other.
The swimmer’s body weight starts to shift
over the left arm as the arm starts to pull with
the hand flexed at the wrist, applying pressure
c
on the water (figure 3.1c). The right arm is
drawn inward to the side of the body (ad-
ducted) as the right hand and forearm com-
plete the thrust in what can best be described as
a “duck foot” action. The face turns sideways in
d time with the backward thrust of the right arm.
The swimmer inhales as the entire body,
from top of the head to tips of the toes, turns
e naturally on its long axis (figure 3.1d). The
recovery of the right arm is made with the
shoulder and elbow leading the action. Note
that the swimmer has not lifted the head to
inhale; the water level remains constant at the
top of the head. The face will return to the water
f
at a speed slightly faster than the recovery of the
right arm, enabling the swimmer to see the
right arm underwater as it enters.
The right hand and forearm move forward
to the entry (figure 3.1e). As the right hand
g
enters, the split-second timing of the arms is
repeated, giving the stroke perfect symmetry
(refer to figure 3.1a). The left arm, hand planed
backward, is about to change its action from a
pull to a strong backward thrust. The face is
h
forward as the hand enters the water, and the
swimmer should see the hand as it enters.
The right arm has completely entered the
water (figure 3.1f). The head remains centered
i
in the long axis of the body. Note the right-angle
timing of the arms in relation to each other. The
swimmer’s body position is streamlined and
balanced—head down, buttocks at the surface,
j leg action inside the body line. Note also the left
hand’s marked acceleration in comparison to
the slower movement of the right hand, which
reaches slowly forward, ready to tilt the body
Figure 3.1 The crawl stroke, side view. over onto its right side (figure 3.1g).

--- Page 67 Text ---
52 Breakthrough Swimming
As the left arm completes its stroke and recov- The hand enters the water fingertips first
ers smoothly, the body moves onto its right side and the elbow set higher than the hand. The
(figure 3.1h). In this transition phase, the weight entry is on an imaginary line forward of the
of the recovery arm and shift in body balance armpit. The arm slides forward until almost
provide powerful assistance to the start of the fully extended. The hand moves backward into
right arm pull. Note the posture of the right the pull, and the elbow bends progressively
arm—elbow up, hand flexed at the wrist. The until maximum flexion (approximately 90 de-
right hand grips the water as the swimmer feels grees) is reached. Throughout the pull, the
strong water pressure on the palm of the hand. elbow is kept higher than the hand and pointed
The left arm, elbow higher than the wrist, reaches sideways (elbow-up position), which gives
forward to the entry as the right arm moves into maximum leverage and reduces water slip-
the pull (figure 3.1i). The body retains perfect ping off the hand. The maximum elbow bend is
balance as the entire cycle is repeated in continu- reached halfway through the stroke. From here,
ous rhythm. The right arm is now pulling pow- a smooth transition is made into the push phase
erfully and is well into the pull. A complete cycle back to the hips. The stroke finishes with the
of both arms is completed as the left arm enters arm not quite extended.
and the right arm commences the power phase Although the swimmer tries to pull in a direct
of its stroke (figure 3.1j). backward plane, the rotation of the body on its
long axis causes the hand and forearm to move
Front View laterally inward and outward under the torso.
This action produces a natural sculling effect as
The arm stroke is a working phase of pull then
the hand pitches inward across the body and
push. Throughout the stroke, the posture of the
then outward to round out the stroke at the side
arm, elbow, and hand constantly changes (fig-
of the body with the palm facing the body.
ure 3.2). These smoothly made adjustments give
The arm is relaxed to enable the momentum
the swimmer leverage to apply muscular power.
created during the stroke to carry the arm into
the recovery with minimal muscular effort.
Although the arm stroke has been described as
a series of part movements, the stroke is per-
formed smoothly, with each movement flow-
a ing smoothly into the next. Complete fluency is
achieved when a swimmer can repeat correct
e
patterns continuously for stroke after stroke.
b f Key Points on the Crawl
• Body balance, correct timing, and mo-
mentum are important factors. Only when
the body is balanced equally on both sides of
c g
its long axis during the swimming stroke can
there be efficient timing between one arm
and the other. When the body is balanced
and each arm is timed with the other with
split-second efficiency, the swimmer can
d h
maintain an overall momentum throughout
each complete stroke cycle. The result is that
the swimmer has an easy run through the
water that produces a ghostlike glide. As one
Figure 3.2 The crawl stroke, front view. hand finishes stroking, the other is already

--- OCR from Page 67 Image 1 ---
E> Be I Be

--- OCR from Page 67 Image 2 ---
Ger

(<7)

--- Page 68 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 53
propelling so that no time lag interrupts the stabilizes body balance and assists adequate
continuous rhythmic flow of the arm stroke. respiration without interfering with propul-
sion. The head should remain in the long axis
• The slow forward reach of the arm and
of the body. Moving the head out of the long
shoulder at the entry performs three func-
axis will distort body alignment.
tions simultaneously:
• Synchronize the movement of the head
1. Extending the entry arm forward
with the arm action. All movements of the
slowly helps preserve the momen-
head should be made slowly and smoothly,
tum being developed by the pull of
and the water level should remain constant.
the opposite arm.
The head should be forward in line with the
2. The forward extension of each arm
long axis of the body as each arm enters. The
as it enters causes the body to roll
head turns smoothly to breathe a split-
onto its side, a motion that brings
second after one arm enters. The turn of the
into play the large trunk muscles to
head is made during the natural roll of the
aid the power phase of the stroke.
body. Inhalation is through the mouth. Ex-
3. The forward extension also places halation commences immediately after the
the body in a streamlined alignment. mouth returns to the water and continues
through the mouth until the lips return to
• Hand-wrist posture is important. Note
the surface for the next inhalation. The out-
how the posture of the hand on the wrist is
ward breath should flow out, not be blown
constantly adjusted to keep the hand planed
out, except for a final puff of air through the
directly backward. Particularly at the end of
mouth as it clears the surface. Lips should
the stroke, pulling upward would depress
curl outward to prevent accidental inhala-
the hips and cause resistance. Relaxing the
tion of water. Should you gulp in water,
wrist keeps water pressure on the hand,
shape your tongue as if you’re pronouncing
which keeps the hand planing directly back-
the letter K; this should prevent you from
ward instead of upward.
gagging.
• To avoid retarding momentum, a
• Special attention should be given to the
smooth recovery of each arm should be made
changing postures of the elbow during the
at approximately the same speed as the body.
underwater stroke. Freestyle swimmers
Bring the hand forward in the recovery—
should attempt to keep the elbow in a high
don’t snatch it forward as if you’re swim-
position during the initial stage of the pull.
ming in glue! The face should be forward as
The high elbow posture is an important stroke
each hand enters the water, and the swim-
fundamental and is easily achieved by point-
mer should see each hand as it enters; this is
ing the elbow out to the side while keeping
a stroke fundamental.
the armpit open. Although this is only a
• Be aware of head position as the hand
fleeting phase of the total action, a high
enters. Many swimmers lose their timing by
elbow enables the swimmer to combine the
incorrectly turning their head to breathe be-
strength of the arm rotators with that of the
fore the forward hand has entered the water.
arm depressors as the body is levered for-
Even top swimmers, try as they will, some-
ward using the shoulder as the fulcrum. The
times can’t get the stroke into its normal
hand and forearm keep planing backward
rhythm. Often, the difficulty is caused by
until they are almost perpendicular to the
turning the head too soon to inhale. When a
water surface. At this stage, the elbow and
swimmer’s stroke seems off balance or off
upper arm are drawn inward toward the
timing, tell the swimmer to make sure to see
torso in a powerful motion as the swimmer
the hand enter before turning the head to
completes the stroke. Throughout the change
breathe.
in elbow posture, the swimmer must retain
• Head-turning mechanics and general the pressure of the water on the palm of the
posture of the head are important. The head hand by keeping it planed backward.

--- Page 69 Text ---
54 Breakthrough Swimming
• Talented swimmers use several differ- The Crawl Stroke Start
ent kicking patterns, even during a single
The grab start is shown in figure 3.3. In figure
race. The principle involved in broken-tempo
3.3a, note that feet are positioned with toes
kicking, as it is called, is that the legs may
gripping the front of the block. The hands
follow any pattern, as long as rhythm and
lightly grasp the block with one hand on either
balance are not affected. Modern swimming
side of the feet.
greats are not as style regimented as those
from previous swimming generations. They
often shift naturally from one cadence to
another without thinking about it. A swim-
mer may switch from a reduced, very light
kick to a six-beat, depending on whether he
or she is trying to conserve energy or sprint
to meet a rival’s challenge.
In distance swimming, one of history’s
greatest breakthrough swimmers, Australia’s
Grant Hackett, 2000 Olympic and 2001 World
1500 meter champion, (his world mark set in a b
Fukuoka in 2001, is an amazing 14:34.56)
reduces the tiring effects of overkicking by
using a subdued kick when swimming the
middle and long distances. A growing theory
in modern swimming is that whether a two-
beat or six-beat kick is used, as long as the
kick is easy and at an aerobic level of inten- c
sity, it helps remove lactate.
• Loose ankles increase propulsion. The
key to easy and efficient kicking is to keep
d
the ankles and feet loose and flexible. Feel-
ing the water passing between the toes of
e
both feet is an indication that the ankles are
loose and the feet are performing a supple,
f
weaving action. At speed, this motion be-
comes a powerful whiplash that provides
counterbalance and thrust directly inside
the body line.
Swimmers should keep the ankles
stretched by doing stretching exercises. One
effective exercise is to sit on the floor, cross-
ing the right leg over the left. With the left
hand, grasp the toes of the right foot with
the palm placed along the sole of the foot.
With the right hand, grasp the leg above the
ankle to steady the foot. The left hand now
turns the right foot in a rotary motion. Pull
the top of the toes down to fully extend the
ankle and foot. Repeat the exercise on the
g
left foot.

--- Page 70 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 55
tance is being swum, the swimmer should not
turn the head to breathe until he or she has
taken about six strokes after surfacing and is
h well into the stroke rhythm.
The rules restrict the swimmer to 15 meters
(16.4 yards) underwater after the start and turn.
At this point, the head should appear above the
surface.
i
The Crawl Stroke Turn
The crawl stroke turn is really a gymnastic
j event in which the swimmer performs a for-
ward somersault with a half-twist. The
swimmer’s forward momentum is first arrested
and then developed in the opposite direction. If
the head stops at any stage of the turn, momen-
tum is lost, and so is speed.
k On the approach to the wall, the swimmer
uses incoming forward momentum to provide
the initial rotating movement of the turn (fig-
ure 3.4a). The head and forward arm dive be-
low the surface. A quick dolphin kick adds
momentum and lifts the hips.
l
Figure 3.3 The crawl stroke grab start.
At the starting signal, the swimmer pulls the
a
body downward until the heels lift to tip the
swimmer’s center of balance forward over the
front of the block (figure 3.3b). The arms are
thrown forward as the legs extend vigorously
(figure 3.3c). The swimmer’s body is fully ex-
tended as it reaches the peak of its trajectory b
(figure 3.3d). As the head tucks down below the
arms, the hips are piked to help the swimmer
achieve an ideal angle of entry (figures 3.3e and
3.3f). The entire body enters through the same
hole in the water. As soon as the body is com-
pletely submerged, the swimmer arches the
back to bring the body horizontal to the surface
c
(figure 3.3g).
Most swimmers perform the dolphin kick
before starting the flutter kick prior to surfac-
ing (figures 3.3h and 3.3i). The first arm stroke
brings the swimmer to the surface, while the
other arm remains extended forward (figures
3.3j and 3.3k). As soon as the head breaks the
d
surface, both arms take up the rhythm of the
full stroke (figure 3.3l). No matter what dis- Figure 3.4 The crawl stroke turn.

--- OCR from Page 70 Image 1 ---
Oe ee ee
ese ee ee

oS. cs
~~ a
SS SWAT
h
a ee eet ee re ee, — —_~— —

a

--- Page 71 Text ---
56 Breakthrough Swimming
The head continues through the turn with- To achieve and maintain the desired high hip
out stopping (figure 3.4b). In fact, the whole position, a butterfly swimmer depends on ac-
body moves continuously. The swimmer’s back curate timing of the head movement, arm stroke,
is thrown toward the wall as the hips pike and and leg action. The face must come out of the
the knees are brought into the chest. As the water before the hands leave the water, then re-
swimmer approaches the wall, the forward enter the water a split second before the hands.
hand continues through without hesitation, The upper arms should be drawn toward the
while the pulling arm completes a half-stroke body (adducted) as the initial rounded phase of
and flexes at the elbow to join in a backward the arm stroke is completed. This action brings
sculling motion with the forward arm, which is into play the powerful muscles of the trunk and
also now bent. the shoulder girdle for the final backward thrust
In the continuing action of the turn the body of the stroke.
performs a half-twist (figure 3.4c), almost like a There are two downward leg beats for each
jujitsu artist performing a break fall and land- arm stroke. The first beat occurs as the arms
ing on the point of the shoulder. As the hips enter the water, and the second beat is timed as
pass over the head, the head continues through the hands push backward to end the stroke.
and the feet are placed on the wall. (Note that
the rules do not require the hands to touch the Side View
wall at the turn but that some part of the body
In figure 3.5a, the hips have reached their high-
must touch the wall.) Without hesitation, the
est point in the stroke cycle as the preceding
leg thrust commences, with the swimmer thrust-
downward leg beat ends. (The preceding ac-
ing from the wall using the toes only and not a
tion is shown in figures 3.5h, 3.5i, and 3.5j.) The
flat placement of the heels. Simultaneously, the
head is kept down between the arms, and the
arms extend forward as the swimmer’s body
chest is pushed forward.
once more assumes a prone position. At this
The hands are turned outward as the pull
point, the body should be deep enough to
starts (figure 3.5b). The upper arms remain
avoid pushing off into disturbed surface water.
close and almost parallel to the surface. The
Note that as of March 6, 1998, a FINA rule limits
elbows bend as the arms spread outward from
the swimmer to an underwater pushoff no
the shoulder line. The spreading of the arms
greater than 15 meters (16.4 yards), by which
allows the body to continue its forward-sliding
point the head must have broken the surface.
momentum as the torso is pressed downward
As the swimmer planes gradually to the
between the outspread arms.
surface before taking the first stroke (figure
The hands and forearms are now angled
3.4d), he or she may use either a dolphin kick
directly backward, with the elbows still high
or a flutter kick. Six strokes should be taken
and close to the surface (figure 3.5c). The
before the swimmer resumes a regular breath-
rounded action of the arms gives the feet time
ing pattern.
to recover in preparation for the next down-
ward beat. The swimmer remains below the
The Technique
surface as the hands and forearms round out to
of the Butterfly Stroke complete the first lateral phase of the pull. The
head starts to lift to prevent the body from
In the butterfly stroke, the swimmer’s body sinking too low. The high elbow position pro-
moves through a rapidly changing range of vides strong leverage and effective hydrody-
different shapes, during which the hips, acting namic shaping of the arms.
as a fulcrum, always ride high in the water. The The pull remains shallow as the upper arms
complete stroke cycle is characterized by a move back and in toward the sides of the body
teeter-totter motion of the body, which contin- (figure 3.5d). The elbows remain high and in
ues throughout the stroke cycle with the ful- line. The hands come closer together under the
crum centered just below the hips. shoulders while the forearms move to a posi-

--- Page 72 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 57
3.5e). The pull rapidly accelerates as the hands
and forearms thrust backward to complete the
stroke. The combined forces developed by the
a final arm thrust and the second downward
kick lift the head and shoulders above the
surface. With face downward, the mouth clears
b the water just before the hands exit. The swim-
mer inhales a split second before the hands
c leave the water.
The hands, palms facing the body, continue
through to clear the water’s surface as the
d
arms, rotating in the shoulder joints, recover
laterally over the water (figure 3.5f). Note that
the arms do not straighten completely at the
end of the stroke.
e The body is at its highest point in the stroke
cycle. The arms recover with elbows slightly bent
(figure 3.5g). The head will start to drop as the
arms reach a line with the shoulders (figure 3.5h).
Figure 3.5i shows a key phase in the timing of
the overall stroke. The head submerges quickly
f
before the arms enter; the hands and forearms
submerge last. The feet rise as they prepare to
kick downward.
The legs complete their first downward kick
and pause for a split-second to allow the body
g
to continue its run before the next arm stroke
(figure 3.5j). In this ultrastreamlined position,
h the body’s momentum continues as it slips
forward smoothly under the surface. The hands
are bladed outward as they compress the on-
i
coming flow of water along the palms before
the start of the next stroke.
Front View
j The head submerges before the arms enter
(figure 3.6a). The arms are almost straight as
Figure 3.5 The butterfly stroke, side view.
they enter just wide of their respective shoul-
ders. The arms, medially rotated, are almost
tion vertical to the surface. The knees are flexed straight and parallel to the surface. The arms
as the legs start the second downward beat. are slightly wider than the shoulders, the hands
Unlike the first downward beat, which natu- turned outward at an approximately 45-degree
rally results from the hips being pushed up- angle.
ward as the arms enter (see figures 3.5h, 3.5i, An initial outward scull is performed as
and 3.5j), the second downward beat is con- the elbows bend and the arms spread out-
sciously directed by the swimmer. ward and downward (figure 3.6b). The hands
The swimmer rapidly draws the upper arms blade outward as the rounded first part of the
inward toward the side of the body until the pull commences. The shoulders are sub-
elbows face backward toward the feet (figure merged. Note the high position of the upper

--- Page 73 Text ---
58 Breakthrough Swimming
arms and elbows. This position of the upper
arms helps the swimmer develop powerful
leverage and marks the difference between
swimming efficiently and struggling with
a
brute strength.
As the elbow bend increases, the hands cut
inward in a rounded action that brings them
b close together under the body (figure 3.6c). The
elbows reach their maximum bend (approxi-
mately 90 degrees) as the hands come closer
together under the waist to complete the
rounded first part of the stroke.
c
The action changes from a pull to a back-
ward thrust as the upper arms move in toward
the sides of the body and the forearms and
hands push directly backward (figure 3.6d).
Note how the chin is gradually eased forward
as the stroke progresses until the mouth clears
the surface for inhalation just as the hands
d complete their backward thrust.
The stroke finishes, and the hands turn palm-
inward at the thighs (figure 3.6e). This action
helps the swimmer recover the arms with bent
elbows leading the action, as in the crawl stroke.
The swimmer inhales just before the hands
round out past the thighs to exit the water. As
the shoulders clear the surface of the water, the
e
arms start their recovery with elbows bent
(figure 3.6f).
The body is in the high sailing position that
results from correct timing (figure 3.6g). The
elbow bend increases as the forearms swing
f
loosely forward in preparation for the entry.
The degree of elbow bend depends on the
flexibility and strength of the swimmer. A bent-
g elbow recovery reduces the radius of the recov-
ery action, thereby improving stroke accuracy
and reducing strain on the upper arm and back
muscles. The head and torso drop under the
surface a split-second before the arms enter
(figure 3.6h). Finally, as shown in figure 3.6i, the
swimmer returns to the position shown in fig-
h
ure 3.6a.
i
Figure 3.6 The butterfly stroke, front view.

--- Page 74 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 59
may depend on the length of the race. The
Key Points on Butterfly
swimmer may need to breathe more fre-
quently the farther the distance covered.
• Correct head-timing mechanics are vi-
• There are two downward beats of the
tally important to the rhythm of the total
legs to each arm stroke. The first downward
action. Remember two important points:
beat occurs as the arms enter. The second
1. After the swimmer has inhaled,
downward beat occurs as the hands thrust
the face should return to the water
backward into the push phase of the stroke.
a split-second before the hands
• Timing the two downward beats has
enter.
three important functions:
2. The face should clear the water to
1. to ensure continuous propulsion,
inhale a split-second before the
hands come out. 2. to maintain body streamlining, and
• Inhalation is through the mouth only. 3. to aid head mechanics.
Exhalation is through the mouth only or • The first downward beat is made soon
through the mouth and nose simultaneously. after the hands have entered the water. This
• Once the hands enter the water, the timing is critical because the body has decel-
swimmer starts to exhale slowly. Through- erated during the arm recovery. If the first
out the arm stroke, exhalation gradually in- beat did not take place at this point, speed
creases in intensity and finishes with a force- would slacken more before the arms started
ful puff of air a moment before the mouth the next stroke. Timing the first beat at this
clears the water. The inward breath is taken stage also keeps the hips high and the body
through the mouth in the final stage of the streamlined as the arm stroke starts. The
arm push. second downward beat counters the drop of
the hips caused by the hands pushing up to
• The swimmer should start easing the
the surface. When the second beat is cor-
chin forward at the beginning of the stroke,
rectly timed, the swimmer is more easily
then lifting the head gradually in time with
able to raise the head for inhalation.
the arm stroke. As the hands come close to-
gether in the middle of the stroke, the shoul-
The Butterfly Start
ders and head are rising in the water. From
this position, the swimmer has strong lever-
The grab start is shown in figure 3.7. In figure
age to clear the face from the water in time to
3.7a, the feet are positioned with toes gripping
inhale. As the push of the arms takes place,
the front of the block. The hands lightly grasp
the swimmer should see the surface water
the block with one hand on either side of the feet.
beneath the face before inhaling. The lips are
At the starting signal, the swimmer pulls the
curled outward so that water does not enter
body downward until heels lift to tip the
the mouth.
swimmer’s center of balance forward over the
• Inhalation should be completed as the front of the block (figure 3.7b). The arms are
arms pass the head during recovery. The face thrown forward as the legs extend vigorously
should return to the water a split-second (figure 3.7c). The swimmer’s body is fully ex-
before the hands enter. Novices may be taught tended as it reaches the peak of its trajectory
to breathe once every arm cycle or once (figure 3.7d).
every two strokes, depending on which pat- As the head tucks down below the arms, the
tern results in the quickest learning process. swimmer pikes at the hips to achieve a steep
In breathing once every two strokes, the entry, with the entire body plunging through
breath is held throughout the first arm cycle. the same hole in the water (figures 3.7e and
Exhalation and inhalation occur during the 3.7f). The lower back is arched to keep the body
second arm cycle. The ideal breathing rhythm moving directly forward and parallel to the
is a matter of individual preference and also surface (figure 3.7g).

--- Page 75 Text ---
60 Breakthrough Swimming
k
l
a b
m
c
n
d
o
e
f
p
Figure 3.7 The butterfly start.
The rules permit swimmers to be completely
submerged for 15 meters (16.4 yards) after the
start and turn. By that point, the head must
have broken the surface. While underwater,
one or more kicks are permitted (figures 3.7h,
g 3.7i, 3.7j, 3.7k, and 3.7l), but only one pull is
allowed, which must bring the swimmer to the
surface (figures 3.7m, 3.7n, 3.7o, and 3.7p).
The Butterfly Turn
The swimmer uses the body’s momentum to
h
bring the body toward the wall. Then, by keep-
ing head and shoulders moving out again, the
swimmer redirects the momentum in the op-
posite direction.
i
The swimmer allows momentum to bring the
body toward the wall, but the body should not
come too close to the wall at the touch (figure
3.8a). The rules of butterfly swimming state that
both hands must touch the wall simultaneously
j
at, above, or below the water’s surface.

--- OCR from Page 75 Image 5 ---
me Ne ee ee ee
en

SS

--- OCR from Page 75 Image 6 ---
eee ON were Nt eee eee ee wre

--- Page 76 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 61
15 meters (16.4 yards) after the start and after
each turn. The swimmer is allowed one or more
a
leg kicks and one arm pull under the water,
which must bring him or her to the surface. By
that point, the head must have broken the
surface. The swimmer must remain on the sur-
face until the next turn or finish.
The FINA rule on the butterfly turn is that at
b each turn the swimmer’s body should be on the
breast. The touch should be made with both
hands simultaneously at, above, or below the
water’s surface. Once the touch has been made,
the swimmer may turn in any manner desired.
The shoulders must be at or past the vertical
toward the breast when the swimmer leaves
c
the wall.
The Technique of the Backstroke
The fundamentals of the back crawl stroke, or
backstroke, are similar to those of the front
d
crawl with two significant exceptions:
1. The face is not submerged in the back
crawl, so there’s no need for head-turn-
ing mechanics.
2. The back crawl stroke is performed with
e the arms out to the side of the body.
The lateral arm pull of the back crawl is less
efficient than that of the crawl stroke because
the arms are at a mechanical disadvantage
Figure 3.8 The butterfly turn.
when they cannot pull directly under the body
and thus develop their full potential power. For
all swimmers, except those highly talented,
After touching the wall, the arm on the side
this limitation also inhibits ideal stroke fre-
to which the body will turn is pulled back from
quency.
the wall with the elbow bent (figure 3.8b). The
opposite hand pushes against the wall to move Side View
the head and shoulders away from the wall
(figure 3.8c). As this happens, the knees bend In figure 3.9a, the right arm has entered the
and tuck under the body. The touching hand is water a split-second before the left arm has
removed from the wall and joins with the free completed its stroke; this ensures continuous
hand to prepare for the outward thrust from propulsion.
the wall. The feet are placed on the wall, and the The right elbow bends as the arm starts to
swimmer thrusts out into the pushoff with pull (figure 3.9b). The roll of the body toward
body streamlined and arms and legs extended the pulling arm brings the powerful large
(figures 3.8d and 3.8e). trunk muscles into the action. The left arm,
The rules restrict swimmers from being com- with the shoulder leading, is about to leave the
pletely submerged for a distance greater than water.

--- Page 77 Text ---
62 Breakthrough Swimming
The right elbow bend increases as the left
arm recovers in the vertical plane (figure 3.9c).
The head is centered in the long axis of the body
a to ensure perfect balance and prevent excessive
sideways movement of the body.
The right elbow reaches maximum bend,
b
causing the right hand to come close to the
surface (figure 3.9d); however, the roll of the
body to that side prevents the hand from
breaking out of the water. The right hand and
c
forearm are at an approximately 90-degree
angle to the surface. The left hand moves
slightly faster than the right, ensuring the
necessary slight overlap in the timing of the
arms.
The recovery arm, still in the vertical plane,
d
accelerates as it reaches forward to the entry
(figure 3.9e). The hand will enter little finger
first. The right hand and forearm, nearing the
end of the push phase of the stroke, accelerate
e
rapidly. The upper right arm is drawn toward
the swimmer’s side as the elbow extends, and
the hand—relaxed at the wrist—thrusts di-
f
rectly backward.
The left arm enters the water (figure 3.9f),
and the split-second timing of the arms is
repeated, giving the stroke perfect symmetry
(compare with figure 3.9a). The left arm enters
g
deep below the surface in line with the back,
an action that keeps the hips high and reduces
resistance. The hand, palm-down, finishes the
stroke by pressing down below the hip.
With the shoulder leading, the right arm
h moves smoothly into the recovery without
waiting at the hips (figure 3.9g). The body roll
brings the large trunk muscles into play and
allows the swimmer to synchronize the pull of
the left arm with the vertical recovery of the
i right arm (figure 3.9h). The right arm, still
recovering vertically, moves to the entry slightly
faster than the left hand, which is completing
j
its stroke (figure 3.9i). Note the high position of
the hips. Finally, the cycle is completed (figure
Figure 3.9 The backstroke, side view. 3.9j).

--- Page 78 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 63
Front View Without pausing, the entry arm presses down
deep to a line with the back. Then the elbow
The arm enters the water behind the shoul-
starts to bend, and the body rolls toward the
der, elbow straight, little finger first (figure
pulling arm (figure 3.10b). The opposite arm,
3.10a). The opposite arm, palm down, com-
with shoulder leading, leaves the water (figure
pletes its pull with a vigorous thrust below
3.10c). The recovery arm, with elbow straight,
the hip. For a brief moment both arms are
recovers in the vertical plane in a trajectory
completely submerged, ensuring continuous
aimed directly over the shoulder. The body roll
propulsion.
starts to reverse direction. The elbow of the
pulling arm continues to bend to a maximum of
90 degrees (figure 3.10d).
The recovery arm, without deviation from
the vertical, accelerates slightly as it passes
a f back over the shoulder (figure 3.10e). This ac-
celeration will cause a slight overlap in the
stroke as the arm enters the water. The pulling
arm with the upper arm drawn to the side of the
body is now set to thrust backward to the end
of the stroke (figures 3.10f through 3.10j). The
b g
same sequence of pull and recovery is repeated
on the other side of the body.
Key Points on Backstroke
c h • Ideal body position is essential if the
stroke is to be made with maximum effi-
ciency. All other phases of the complete stroke
depend on this basic fundamental. The swim-
mer should imagine lying flat on the back
without a pillow. The body should be bal-
anced on the back of the shoulders with the
front of the hip bones touching the water’s
surface. There is no break at the hips that
d i would cause the broad surface of the back to
set up resistance to the water, with the hand
finishing the stroke too deep to exit easily. At
speed, ideal body position can be checked by
looking for the waterline at the waist.
• The arms are recovered from the water
without any deviation from the vertical plane
e j from the moment the arms leave the water
until they enter again behind the shoulders.
Figure 3.10 The backstroke, front view. Any lateral motion of the arm in recovery

--- OCR from Page 78 Image 1 ---
OQ

--- OCR from Page 78 Image 4 ---
46 i

--- Page 79 Text ---
64 Breakthrough Swimming
will throw the body off balance and affect that the timing has been correctly handled.
the propulsive action of the opposite arm. At no stage of the entire arm cycle do the
Permitting the arm to drop out of the verti- hands pause in their continuous action and
cal plane after it has passed over the shoul- especially not when the hands reach the side
der will result in water resistance against the of the body at the end of the pull. As the
upper arm and shoulder. Furthermore, the hands complete the stroke, the rhythm of the
hand will enter too wide of the shoulder and stroke is preserved by the swimmer thinking
tend to slice the water instead of making a ahead of the movement and making the arm
firm grip at the start of the pull. go around and out past the hips into the air,
• The entry is the most important phase without stopping.
of backstroke timing. Some swimmers crash • The swimmer should find the fastest
the hand into the water or commence the arm tempo possible without losing control
pull when part of the hand and/or forearm is of the movement, cutting or slicing the water
not completely submerged. These faults usu- open, or upsetting rhythm. The closer the
ally occur in swimmers who have poor shoul- swimmer can emulate the tempo of his or her
der flexibility or incorrect body position. At crawl stroke arm action, the more efficient
the arm entry, the arm should form an imagi- the backstroke rhythm will become. It is
nary straight line from the fingertips to the more common for backstrokers to stroke too
lower aspect of the shoulder blade. This slowly than too quickly. There is a balance
position is attained by keeping the shoulder between the amount of purchase the swim-
blades slightly drawn together (adducted) mer obtains and the tempo of the stroke. Too
to keep the back flat, enabling the entire arm much purchase may cause the swimmer to
to enter the water easily. bog down, while too little may cause useless
• As the hand approaches the entry, it rapid turnover and cavitation—like an
should speed up slightly so that both arms automobile’s wheels revolving in mud.
overlap slightly, and for a split second both • Lenny Krayzelburg of the United States,
arms are submerged beneath the surface, the backstroke champion at the 2000 Sydney
thus preserving the momentum of the stroke. Olympic Games, is a rarity among
The hand should make a deft quickening backstrokers in that his backstroke turnover
movement as it enters the water—almost is faster than his freestyle turnover. He once
like a pickpocket in action—and feel the told me that he works a great deal on his
pressure of the water immediately. Without tempo. Using stretch cords, he practices swim-
any preliminary riding action out front, the ming out to the middle of the pool and tries
hand moves straight into the stroke. to hold a certain tempo for 30 seconds and 50
• As the hand and forearm push back- seconds. As a result, he is able to maintain a
ward, the upper arm is drawn strongly in- tempo of over 50 strokes per minute over the
ward (adducted) toward the side of the body 100-meter distance in competition; over the
to bring into action the strong muscles of the 200-meter distance, his tempo is more than
chest and back. During this quick transition, 40 strokes per minute (Colwin 2000).
the swimmer should retain strong pressure
• For many reasons, it is important to keep
of the water on the palm of the hand.
the kick inside the body line. This keeps the
• The recovery arm reaches up to the power source from the kick directly behind
entry slightly faster than the hand complet- the swimmer’s body and permits the water to
ing the pull. As the recovery hand enters, the flow smoothly along the legs to preserve
opposite hand completes a pronating (palm streamlining. Dropping the lower legs will
turned downward) action. At this stage, cause resistance by increasing the tendency to
water pressure should be felt on the palm of pull the hips down to a sitting position in the
the entry hand as well as the hand of the water which, in turn, will interfere with ob-
finishing arm. This is the swimmer’s check taining a clean arm entry. Too wide a kick will

--- Page 80 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 65
slow down the desired high tempo of the d
arms. Swimmers should try to make the kick
start from the hips, then flex the knees slightly
as the movement passes down the legs in a
wavelike motion, finishing in a whiplash ac-
tion of the ankles and feet. If the swimmer
feels the water passing between the toes
throughout the kick, the swimmer’s leg ac-
tion is working well inside the body line.
e
• A point often overlooked by novice
backstrokers is the importance of correct
breathing technique. Inhalation and exhala-
f
tion should take place through the mouth. A
point to remember is that if the swimmer
breathes too slowly and leisurely, the tempo
of the arm action may also become too slow.
The swimmer should experiment to find a
breathing rhythm that is neither too slow nor g
too fast.
The Backstroke Start
Prior to the starting signal, the swimmer holds
steady by gripping the handles and placing one
h
foot below the other against the wall to avoid
slipping (figure 3.11a). A spring is created by
exerting pressure on the fingers and toes. The
eyes are directed forward, and the head is held
erect.
i
a j
b
k
l
c Figure 3.11 The backstroke start.

--- Page 81 Text ---
66 Breakthrough Swimming
At the starting signal, the swimmer pulls The first arm stroke should be close to the
strongly on the handles and pushes hard with body. This action, combined with the stream-
the legs in a movement that will start to lift the lined position of the submerged forward arm,
body clear of the water (figure 3.11b). The hands will keep the swimmer moving straight ahead
release the handles, and the legs thrust power- during the breakout into the surface. Once on
fully against the wall (figure 3.11c). The hips the surface, the swimmer should not inhale for
lift, and the swimmer starts to move out over the first six strokes, which allows him or her to
the water. immediately work into a fast tempo instead of
The swimmer drops the hands toward the a gradual buildup to speed with each succes-
water surface (figure 3.11d), which lifts the hips sive stroke.
clear of the water. The head is aligned with the
spine. Further momentum is added as feet and The Backstroke Turn
ankles extend to give a final powerful thrust
against the wall. The arms are thrown vigor- At the approach to the wall, the swimmer looks
ously out sideways and forward as the body toward the forward arm and starts to roll the
launches into a shallow dive over the water entire body in the same direction (figure 3.12a).
(figure 3.11e). The swimmer enters the water in The head keeps turning until the swimmer is
a shallow trajectory without landing flat on the facing the bottom of the pool (figure 3.12b). At
back, which would cause tremendous resis- the same time, the forward arm does a reverse
tance (figure 3.11f). sculling motion, which causes the shoulders
Before starting to kick, the swimmer takes a and hips to roll over. The left arm and left leg
short glide. The arms are fully extended with cross over the body’s long axis to assist the
head kept well back between the arms to en- body’s continuing roll to the prone position.
sure good streamlining. Most modern back- The head keeps moving as it leads the body
stroke swimmers will do several underwater into a forward somersault aided by a dolphin
dolphin kicks. Some, such as Olympic cham- kick that lifts the hips as the body pikes, and
pion Lenny Krayzelberg, manage to do as many the back is thrown over toward the wall. Both
as 13 dolphin kicks before surfacing. A swim- hands assist in pulling the body forward and
mer may do either a dolphin kick (figures over (figures 3.12c and 3.12d). Now the hands
3.11g, 3.11h, and 3.11i) or a flutter kick (figures join together as they quickly reverse direction
3.11j, 3.11k, and 3.11l), depending on individual to help the body maintain its continuing roll
aptitude. (figure 3.12e). The legs swing over the head,
Why is the underwater dolphin kick faster and the feet are placed lightly on the wall
than the full stroke on the surface? Because without the heels touching the wall (figure
there is no wave drag underwater. Wave drag is 3.12f).
a considerable component of the overall drag Once again on the back, the swimmer pushes
in surface swimming. off with arms and legs extended and the entire
Note that the rules limit the swimmer to 15 body in a streamlined posture (figure 3.12g). The
meters (16.4 yards) underwater after the start swimmer will use either a dolphin kick or flutter
and turn. By that point, the head must have kick before starting the arm stroke. The rules
broken the surface. The swimmer commences restrict the swimmer to 15 meters (16.4 yards)
the stroking action by pulling with the stron- underwater after the start and turn. By that
gest arm first. (In this particular case, the swim- point, the head must have broken the surface.
mer is lefthanded.) The swimmer must take The FINA rule on the backstroke turn says,
care to keep the opposite arm submerged and “Upon completion of each length, some part
well behind the head as the first stroke is taken, of the swimmer must touch the wall. During
or he or she may either come out from under the turn, shoulders may turn past the vertical
the surface too suddenly or swim across the toward the breast. If the swimmer turns past
lane at a tangent. the vertical, such motion must be part of a

--- Page 82 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 67
continuous turning action and the swimmer
must return to a position on the back before
the feet leave the wall.”
a
The Technique of the Wave
Action Breaststroke
Unlike the conventional breaststroke in which
b the shoulders remain submerged throughout
the stroke, the technique of the wave action
breaststroke is designed to reduce water resis-
tance by making the shoulders follow the line
of an imaginary wave that rises and falls in
perfect symmetry.
Side View
c
The body is in a streamlined posture with
abdominal muscles drawn in, lower back flat-
tened. The arms and legs are fully extended,
and feet are pointed. The head is between the
d arms, and the swimmer looks straight down at
the bottom of the pool (figure 3.13a). This is the
basic position at the start of the stroke and will
be repeated (figure 3.13i) when the stroke
cycle ends.
As the pull starts, the entire body posture
remains as in figure 3.13a, except that palms
turn outward as the hands plane slightly up-
e
ward to meet the oncoming flow of water (fig-
ure 3.13b).
With elbows up and in line with the shoul-
ders, the swimmer completes an initial circular
motion, at the end of which the hands are
planed directly backward (figure 3.13c). Now,
the hands and forearms are ready to change
direction inward. The swimmer focuses on
pulling the body forward, not upward. The
front thighs remain lined up with the body. The
swimmer begins to hollow the back, thus pre-
f
serving the planing action of the body. Stream-
lining is maintained as the heels lift gently and
the knees spread slightly sideways.
The head, shoulders, and front chest clear
the surface (figure 3.13d). This phase is where
the wave breaststroke differs fundamentally
g from the conventional breaststroke, in which
the shoulders, the widest part of the body, are
Figure 3.12 The backstroke turn. kept submerged. With the upper body still

--- Page 83 Text ---
68 Breakthrough Swimming
The swimmer performs “the lunge,” the
unique feature of the wave breaststroke that
a enables the swimmer to follow the wave (fig-
ure 3.13e). In a radical break from the tradi-
tional pull-kick rhythm of the conventional
breaststroke, the lunge phase takes place be-
b
tween the pull and the kick so that the rhythm
becomes pull-lunge-kick. In this action, the
hands and forearms are thrust forward on and
c
parallel to the surface of the water; the swim-
mer literally throws the body forward over the
water. The body continues to slide forward
with the back still hollowed. The front thighs
are kept in line with the torso to permit a
smooth passage of water under the body. The
d heels rise in preparation for the kick, which will
start when the lunge is about three quarters
through. The kick does not start the lunge but
rather serves to maintain the lunge and keep
the swimmer on the surface.
e The upper arms do not come close to the side
of the chest but follow the hands in front of the
chest to reduce frontal resistance (figure 3.13f).
The posture of the back quickly changes from its
arched shape (concave) to an exactly opposite
f rounded (or convex) shape. As the kick starts,
the degree of hip-joint flexion is approximately
35 degrees, with the lower leg at almost 90
degrees to the surface. The feet, close below the
surface, are dorsi-flexed (everted, or turned out-
ward) at approximately 90 degrees to the shin to
g
catch the water efficiently. Lowering the hips
slightly helps the swimmer accommodate this
changing posture of the legs, thighs, and torso.
The humped dolphin-like posture of the back
h
and a powerful, directly backward kick help the
swimmer keep moving over the water with
shoulders and arms at the surface (figure 3.13g).
The feet remain turned outward (everted) until
i
just before the kick closes, at which point the
Figure 3.13 The wave action breaststroke, side ankles and feet extend to provide a final snap to
view. the kick that thrusts the water directly backward
(figure 3.13h). The swimmer maintains stream-
clear of the surface, the swimmer concentrates lining by looking at the bottom of the pool
on moving forward, not upward. The swim- during this powerful phase of the overall action.
mer inhales as the mouth clears the surface. The The swimmer slides forward under the sur-
hands sweep down under the shoulders and face with body in streamlined alignment (figure
continue forward with the forearms following. 3.13i). The swimmer must not let the legs drop,
The feet do not hang down to cause resistance; as a judge may consider this a dolphin kick, for
both feet are kept in line with the shins. which the swimmer could be disqualified.

--- Page 84 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 69
Front View emerge from the water as the swimmer inhales
(figure 3.14e). Two important points in stream-
The body glides forward with shoulders and
lining: the shoulders are clear of the surface,
hips aligned and arms, legs, and feet extended
and arms are in front of the chest. The swimmer
(figure 3.14a). The shoulders reach forward as
starts the forward “lunge” of the arms (figure
far as possible, and the upper arms press against
3.14f).
the ears to further streamline the oncoming
The kick is directly backward and occurs
flow of water along the body. As shown in
three quarters into the lunge (figure 3.14g),
figures 3.14b and 3.14c, the first stage of the arm
thus helping the swimmer maintain the mo-
pull closely resembles the start of the butterfly
mentum of the lunge. The head is down as the
pull.
legs close to complete their powerful backward
The elbow bend continues as the hands sweep
thrust. The arms and shoulders reach forward
down and inward (figure 3.14d). The elbows
as far as possible (figure 3.14h). With arms and
are kept away from the side trunk as the hands
legs outstretched, the body, once more sub-
join. The head, shoulders, and front chest
merged in streamlined alignment, slides for-
ward parallel to the surface (figure 3.14i).
a f
Key Points on Wave Action
Breaststroke
• As stated earlier, the technique of the
wave action breaststroke is designed to re-
duce water resistance by making the shoul-
b g
ders follow the line of an imaginary wave
that rises and falls in perfect symmetry.
• Get the shoulders up. In marked con-
trast to the conventional breaststroke, dur-
ing the wave action breaststroke the shoul-
c
ders clear the surface as the swimmer
continues to slide forward. To further im-
prove streamlining, the shoulders hunch until
they almost touch the ears.
• In raising the head and upper body, the
d h
change in the posture of the back is impor-
tant. First the swimmer arches the back, and
at the same time, sweeps the arms in quickly
and powerfully to bring the head and torso
high out of the water. The arching of the back
brings the whole resistant part of the body
e i
out of the water and leaves almost only the
swimsuit and legs below the surface. Impor-
tant: The swimmer waits until the last mo-
ment to lift the head. The head is kept down
until the hands have finished the insweep
and are about to lunge forward.
• The lunge is the unique feature of the
Figure 3.14 The wave action breaststroke, front wave breaststroke, occurring between the
view. end of the pull and the start of the kick; the

--- Page 85 Text ---
70 Breakthrough Swimming
hands and forearms are thrust forward on As the head tucks down below the arms, the
and parallel to the surface of the water. Ac- swimmer pikes at the hips to achieve a steep
cording to Mike Barrowman, the leading entry with the entire body plunging through
exponent of the wave breaststroke, the swim- the same hole in the water (figures 3.15e and
mer literally throws the body forward and 3.15f). The lower back is arched to keep the
over into the lunge (Colwin 1999, p. 54). body moving directly forward and parallel to
the surface (figure 3.15g).
• Unlike the pull-kick rhythm of the con-
ventional breaststroke, the wave stroke The underwater swimming phase, after
rhythm is pull-lunge-kick. The timing of the start or turn, begins with a short preliminary
kick is critical—it should start only when the glide with the body outstretched and stream-
lunge is about three quarters through. If the lined (figure 3.15h). Then follows a long pull
kick comes too late, the shoulders will drop through to the hips with another short glide
abruptly, creating a sudden trough in the with the arms close to the body (figures 3.15i
imaginary symmetrical line. The kick should and 3.15j).
come in at the right time to maintain the The hands are turned palms-up as the arms,
upper body’s forward surge over the water. with the elbows and forearms kept close to the
This is the big difference between the con- body in streamlined fashion, are extended
ventional breaststroke and the wave action forward (figure 3.15k). As the legs kick, the
breaststroke. At this point, the posture of the back of the head is tucked down in line with
back will rapidly change from arched or the upper surface of the arms to ensure good
concave to humped or convex. The convex streamlining (figure 3.15l). The head breaks
back posture further improves streamlining the surface as the swimmer starts the arm
and when properly coordinated with the stroke (figure 3.15m). (The swimmer shown
kick, enables the swimmer to apply great here has lifted the head from the surface well
force during the lunge. The kick should be before the arms have separated to start the
made directly backward, with no downward stroke and so is safely within the confines of
component at all. the rule.)
• It’s important to minimize up and down
movements of the hips during the stroke; if
the hips move too much, the center of gravity
moves, thus creating extra work to over-
come drag.
The Breaststroke Start
The grab start is shown in figure 3.15. The feet
are positioned with toes gripping the front of
the block. The hands lightly grasp the block a
b
with one hand on either side of the feet (figure
3.15a).
At the starting signal, the swimmer pulls the
body downward until the heels lift to tip the
swimmer’s center of balance forward over the
front of the block (figure 3.15b). The arms are
thrown forward as legs extend vigorously (fig-
ure 3.15c). The swimmer’s body is fully ex-
tended as it reaches the peak of its trajectory
c
(figure 3.15d).

--- Page 86 Text ---
Strokes, Starts, and Turns 71
After a start or turn, the rules permit a swim-
d mer to take one stroke completely back to the
legs and one kick while wholly submerged.
The head must break the surface of the water
before the hands turn inward at the widest part
e of the second stroke.
The full sequence of entry-glide, pull-glide,
f kick-glide, breakout, is shown here. Note that
some controversy exists about the ideal timing
for each sequence of the underwater swim. A
final decision is usually based on what pro-
duces the best results for the individual swim-
mer. The approach described here still appears
to be sound coaching practice for every phase
of swimming.
g
The Breaststroke Turn
The FINA rules of breaststroke swimming are
that both hands must touch simultaneously
at, above, or below the water’s surface (see
h figure 3.16). Once the touch is made, the swim-
mer may turn in any manner desired. The
shoulders must be at or past the vertical to-
ward the breast when the swimmer leaves the
wall.
i
The swimmer uses the body’s momentum to
bring the body in toward the wall. Then, by
keeping head and shoulders moving out again,
redirects the momentum in the opposite direc-
j tion.
The swimmer allows momentum to bring
the body in toward the wall. At the touch, the
swimmer should not allow the body to come
k too close to the wall (figure 3.16a).
After touching the wall, the arm, on the side
to which the body will turn, is pulled back from
the wall with elbow bent (figure 3.16b). The
opposite hand pushes against the wall to move
the swimmer’s head and shoulders away from
l
the wall (figure 3.16c). As this happens, the
knees are bent and tucked under the body.
During this motion, the swimmer inhales in
preparation for the pushoff and ensuing un-
m derwater swim. The touching hand is removed
from the wall and joins with the free hand to
prepare for the outward thrust from the wall.
Figure 3.15 The breaststroke start. Note the sculling motion of the right hand,

--- OCR from Page 86 Image 3 ---
LZ

--- OCR from Page 86 Image 5 ---
ann ae RE ag

--- Page 87 Text ---
72 Breakthrough Swimming
which increases the speed of the body’s rota-
tion and helps set the swimmer at an ideal
depth below the surface.
The feet are placed on the wall, and the
a
swimmer thrusts out into the pushoff with
body streamlined and arms and legs extended
(figure 3.16d). In the pushoff from the wall, the
body remains streamlined, with arms and legs
extended and head beneath the arms and bal-
anced evenly on the breast (figure 3.16e).
The FINA rule states, “After the start and b
each turn the swimmer may take one arm
stroke completely back to the legs and one leg
kick while wholly submerged. The head must
break the surface of the water before the hands
turn inward at the widest part of the second
stroke.”
c
d
e
Figure 3.16 The breaststroke turn.

--- Page 88 Text ---
Part II
Movement
Through
Water

--- Page 90 Text ---
Chapter 4
Understanding
Hydrodynamics
A moving fluid has very different
properties from a static fluid, for as
soon as a swimmer’s hand and the
water start moving in relation to
each other, another force begins to
exert its influence. This force is so
familiar that we accept it without
second thought, yet all propulsion
through a fluid, whether mechani-
cal or natural, depends on it. The
force in question is resistance, or more
precisely, the fluid’s resistance to
motion.
It’s curious that swimming pro-
pulsion has rarely been analyzed in
reference to the resistance of the
water and its resulting flow reac-
tions. Most biomechanical studies
have been based on the convenient
assumption of essentially still wa-
ter, but this treatment is incomplete
because it assumes that swimmers
perform their strokes in negative
space or dry water. Because water
moves under the action of forces,
however, we need to understand
the relative velocities of the hand
and water during swimming. Ide-
ally, the effectiveness of swimming
strokes should be analyzed from
both the biomechanical and fluid
dynamic perspectives.
75

--- Page 91 Text ---
76 Breakthrough Swimming
I have conducted several studies aimed at analyzing the flows around ships and air-
explaining what happens to the water during planes—because we lack a safe and reliable
the swimming action. In the course of these method of making the flow visible.
studies, I have observed the flow reactions
3. Improving propulsion: learning to rec-
produced by the stroke mechanics of world-
ognize through the sense of touch the ideal
class swimmers and applied fluid dynamic
flow reactions necessary to produce efficient
principles to a methodical analysis of under-
propulsion. This involves a new and unique
water movies, videos, and still photographs.
method of coaching stroke mechanics by hav-
The flow reactions in the water produced re-
ing a swimmer associate the feel of the moving
markably similar patterns, and it was soon
water with key phases of the swimming stroke
evident that fluid dynamic principles could
(Colwin 1987). This method is described in
provide a new basis for analyzing stroke effi-
depth in chapter 6.
ciency (Colwin 1984a).
Understanding fluid dynamics as applied to
Understanding Basic Concepts
swimming yields three practical benefits:
1. Understanding propulsion: learning The preliminary explanations in this chapter
how water reacts to the forces developed by are essential to an understanding of the propul-
different propulsive mechanisms—for example, sive mechanisms used in swimming. They out-
pulling straight backward versus pulling in a line in simple terms the ideas that lie behind the
curved-line path. Each mechanism produces mathematical theory of fluid dynamics, the
its own distinctive pattern of flow reactions in branch of science dealing with the application
the water (Colwin 1985b). of propulsive forces in fluids. Indeed, a first
2. Analyzing propulsion: learning to ob- requirement for the following account is famil-
serve and analyze the flow reactions caused by iarity with the basic concepts and terms used in
the swimming stroke. An observer can relate fluid dynamics.
flow reactions to the efficiency of the actual It will be necessary, for example, for the
stroke mechanics by assessing the size, shape, reader to know how streamlines are used to
and placement of the vortex patterns (rotating form the patterns that show the direction, ve-
flows) left in the flow field; when the flow reac- locity, and pressure differences in the flow.
tions are clearly visible, the trained observer can These three factors always have an important
analyze the net effect of an entire stroke almost effect on propulsion. In particular, a flow pat-
at a glance (Colwin 1985a). It is not yet possible, tern reveals whether propulsion is taking place
however, to provide detailed and accurate mea- in steady or unsteady flow, a distinction I’ll
surements of the flow reactions to the swim- explain later. I’ll also explain why airfoil-type
ming stroke—as fluid dynamicists do when lift propulsion cannot occur in unsteady flow.
Science and Swimming
Even at the end of the 20th century, many coaches had not yet realized that to obtain the
full benefit of the new scientific concepts, an entirely different approach to the teaching of
stroke mechanics was required. This is especially true of the interaction between the
swimming stroke and the water.
If we are to develop more effective propulsive mechanisms than those based on present
concepts, we must eventually employ fluid dynamic principles. We have only just begun to
toy with the beginnings of this science as it applies to human swimming. A strong foundation
for future progress will be laid only when biomechanical and fluid dynamic research
proceed in tandem.

--- Page 92 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 77
When we combine this knowledge with the fact the flow so that fluid cannot cross a streamline
that human swimming propulsion takes place but only flow along it. We can thus imagine
mostly in unsteady flow, it becomes apparent adjacent streamlines to form a series of tubes
that top exponents must use a propulsive through which the flow is passing.
mechanism other than the airfoil-type method The picture of flow given by the pattern of
previously thought to predominate. streamlines is, however, much more than a
Flow patterns show us that skilled human chart of flow direction. It is at the same time a
swimmers can develop propulsive forces in map of the velocity field, one that is quite
unsteady flow conditions via a comparatively easily read because of the simple rule that fluid
unorthodox mechanism that does not require velocity is high where streamlines are close
the hand to be presented at all times at an ideal together and low where they are widely sepa-
angle of attack. In fact, propulsion in an un- rated. This is exactly what would be expected
steady flow is a common aspect of fluid dy- if the streamlines indicated the position of real
namic propulsion in nature and is dependent tubes because in a fluid of constant density,
on establishing a flow circulation around a wherever a tube narrows, the velocity must
propelling surface. Later I’ll explain in detail increase if the same mass of fluid is to pass in
this important principle of circulation as it ap- a given time.
plies under various sets of circumstances.
It is necessary, then, to proceed step by step Steady and Nonsteady Flow
through a sequence of simple explanations of
When streamlines retain the same shape at all
important fluid dynamic principles, whose sig-
times, the flow is said to be steady. It is far
nificance to human swimming, especially in
simpler to analyze a pattern of steady flow than
developing new teaching and coaching meth-
unsteady flow because the appearance and
ods, will gradually become apparent. (Refer
velocity of an unsteady flow at any fixed point
also to chapter 6.)
vary from instant to instant.
Using Streamlines to Judge
Flow Patterns
How Water Reacts Under
The pattern of flow around a submerged object
the Action of Forces
can be represented on a diagram by means of a
selection of streamlines. When the fluid veloc-
Like all fluids, water changes shape under the
ity at a given point depends on the position of
action of forces. These changes are known as
the point and on the time, the streamlines alter
deformation and appear as flow and elasticity
from instant to instant. The aggregate of all the
(caused by viscosity). Flow increases continu-
streamlines at a given instant constitutes the
ously without limit under the action of forces,
flow pattern at that instant.
however small. A given force produces elastic-
A flow pattern can be indicated by selecting
ity, which vanishes if the force is removed.
streamlines that show the direction of flow at
Flow and elasticity are the two characteristic
various points in the pattern. Of the infinite
qualities of moving water a skilled swimmer
number of possible streamlines, a few are cho-
feels and recognizes.
sen, usually from 5 to 10, in such a way as to
divide the flow into a number of channels, all
Direction and Velocity of the Flow
carrying the same quantity of water per sec-
Streamlines indicate the direction and velocity ond. Given that a reduction in width corre-
of the flow. Fluid dynamics makes consider- sponds to an increase in velocity, a flow pattern
able use of the concept of streamlines, or lines can be used to give not only the direction of
imagined drawn in the fluid to indicate the flow but, from the spacing of the streamlines,
direction of flow at any point. A streamline is the velocity of flow at any point (figure 4.1).
defined as a curve that is always tangential to With a knowledge of the velocities, fluid

--- Page 93 Text ---
78 Breakthrough Swimming
Figure 4.1 Flow pattern around an airfoil showing the direction and velocity of the flow. Smaller spaces
between streamlines show where velocity of the flow is highest.
dynamicists are able to use a flow pattern to the side of the jar, and the intermediate honey
estimate the pressure forces on the boundaries suffers a distorting motion to which it objects
of the flow. and so resists. The faster the motion, the greater
the resistance.
Viscosity When a piece of rubber is bent or compressed
it exerts a resisting force that disappears only
Water does not accelerate to infinite speed be- when the rubber is allowed to return to its
cause of its viscosity, or more simply, a sticki- undistorted shape. In the case of honey, how-
ness or elasticity. If water had no viscosity, the ever, the resistance is to the distorting motion,
world’s rivers, moving down valleys under the not to the distortion itself, for when the motion
action of gravity, would flow with ever-in- ceases, the viscous drag force disappears—the
creasing speed, reaching hundreds of miles per spoon is not pulled back into the jar, as it would
hour with disastrous results. A swimmer is able be if the honey behaved like rubber. In this
to grip the water only because viscosity pro- sense, viscous resistance is different from elas-
duces separation of the flow. Flow separation tic resistance.
causes a difference in the pattern of pressure Viscous drag effects are always present in
around the hand. Under certain conditions, the movement of air or water past solid bound-
this pressure differential provides the resis- aries, though they are less pronounced than
tance against which propulsion can be applied. those produced by thicker, stickier honey. Again,
Paradoxically, although it helps a swimmer you can readily detect viscous drag effects by
propel, viscosity also results in the form drag holding your hand out the window of a mov-
that resists the body’s forward motion. Because ing automobile or trailing it in the water over
of viscosity, when a body moves through a the side of a speedboat.
fluid the elements of that fluid in contact with Viscosity plays a leading role in any state of
the solid boundary stick to it. They do not slide fluid motion and is of particular importance in
along it as one might expect. The elements close the process of fluid deformation. Fluids do not
to the boundary move past their clinging neigh- simply slip over solid surfaces, whether they
bors. This relative movement brings into play are rough or smooth or, in the case of a swim-
viscous drag forces that oppose motion and mer, shaven or unshaven. In fact, right at the
cause friction or shearing. The reader can easily solid’s surface, velocity is zero.
detect this viscous drag force by pulling a spoon The major part of a viscous deformation is
out of a jar of honey. Part of the honey clings to confined to what is known as the boundary layer,

--- Page 94 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 79
What Happens to the Water?
James “Doc” Counsilman pioneered the use of the motion camera as a scientific instrument
in the search for a better understanding of the swimming strokes. Counsilman’s studies, and
later those of Robert Schleihauf, brought the knowledge of stroke mechanics to a new and
far more advanced level.
But one question remained: What happens to the water when a swimmer applies force
to it? This was a question that had puzzled me for many years, and I wasn’t helped by the
fact that there was almost nothing in the literature on the subject. It was almost as though
propulsion occurred in negative space.
Observing swimmers underwater, all I could see were air bubbles entrapped either by the
arms as they entered the water at speed or by the feet whenever they broke the air-water
boundary at the surface of the water. It took me some time to realize that these air bubbles
left definite patterns in the water, and it took me even longer to finally realize what these
patterns meant.
The thought occurred to me that by trying to relate these flow patterns to the swimming
strokes, some light could be thrown on the topic. From the start, it was clear that the answer,
if any, could be hidden somewhere in the flow field, the surrounding water affected by the
movements of the swimmer’s stroke mechanics.
Then, one day, quite by chance, I was studying some photo slides given to me by Ernie
Maglischo that showed the underwater action of Dave Bottom, a top Californian backstroker
when, among the usual trails of air bubbles, I noted interesting patterns of rotating flows.
Did these flow reactions reveal anything about swimming propulsion? Then I remembered
having seen similar patterns in photographs in Bela Rajki’s book The Technique of
Competitive Swimming. They were among some of the first-ever underwater movie shots of
world-class swimmers and showed a leading Hungarian swimmer, Laslo Magyar, taken 30
years before. It was amazing to note that the flow reactions to the stroke mechanics of the
two swimmers were almost identical, even though the Hungarian was filmed before Bottom
was born.
The similarity between these two sets of flow reactions prompted me to seek further
evidence of common flow reactions in the techniques of world-class swimmers. I also
realized that air entrapment in a swimming stroke is a bonus for the observer because it often
enables flow reactions to be seen. In fact, aeration of the flow field is an accepted
visualization technique used by hydrodynamicists in experimental observation.
The circular patterns in the flow field showed a rotating flow or, in other words, a vortex
circulation. The presence of these definite patterns of rotating flow seemed to show, once
and for all, that air bubbles are not merely haphazard indications of the path taken by the
swimming stroke, as most coaches appear to think.
I now started to look for specific patterns not only in still photos but also in underwater
movies. Rotating flows or vortex effects consistently appeared in the flow field. Gradually,
it became clear that the vortex patterns were definitely a reaction to the propulsive impulses
made by the swimming stroke and, moreover, were not necessarily indicating the path taken
by the stroke.
It was also significant that skilled swimmers uniformly produced symmetrical vortices,
beautiful well-rounded rings that could be described as artistic patterns in the water, while
less competent swimmers tended to have flow reactions in which the vortex rings were
irregularly spaced and distorted.
(continued)

--- Page 95 Text ---
80 Breakthrough Swimming
(continued)
What I observed was so simple that initially I found it difficult to believe the evidence. So,
for a while I had my doubts, but despite myself, I remained fascinated by the regular and
often beautiful vortex patterns I noticed while observing swimmers underwater. I studied
many leading swimmers underwater, especially in the midst of competition when rapid
stroking usually entrapped enough air to make flow reactions more easily visible. It was
soon clear that vortex patterns were not a transient phenomenon because they were too
consistently similar for that to be the case. Gradually it was possible to form a synthesis of
the flow reactions that could be anticipated during key phases of propulsion (Colwin
1984a).
a relatively thin zone immediately adjoining easily until free flow results (figures 4.2a and
the surface of a body moving through a fluid, 4.2b).
such as air or water. The German mathemati- Whenever a fluid flows past a stationary
cian Ludwig Prandtl gave to the world the term obstacle or a solid body moves through a fluid,
boundary layer (Grenzschicht) and thereby in- molecular attraction prevents any relative mo-
troduced a concept now so familiar that it tion between the fluid and the body at the
would be difficult to find many papers on fluid surface itself. Thus, no matter how rapidly a
dynamics in which the term does not occur. fluid is forced through a pipe or a flow channel,
The boundary layer, which is actually com- its speed is exactly zero at the wall. When an
posed of a number of very thin layers, always aircraft or an artillery shell rushes through the
holds a velocity gradient; this means that each atmosphere, the velocity of the air immediately
successive layer moves at a greater speed than adjacent to the surface of the body is, at any
the previous one. At the surface, velocity is instant, exactly equal to that of the moving
zero because the first layer sticks to the skin body, although a fraction of an inch away,
and each successive layer flows a little more outside the boundary layer, it is quite different.
a b
Figure 4.2 Velocity gradient at the boundary layer. (a) Viscosity at the boundary layer causes a velocity
gradient in the passing flow. Flow decreases speed toward the surface. At A the flow is static and at B
it is moving at full speed. (b) The nature of flow over a foil is the result of viscosity (or stickiness) of the
fluid. The first layer actually sticks to the foil surface, not moving at all, but each successive tier of the flow
moves a little faster and gradually builds up to free-stream velocity.

--- OCR from Page 95 Image 2 ---
Curved wing surface

--- Page 96 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 81
The Role of Airfoils airfoil shape and then a twist. The airfoil
contour combined with a twist is a shape
in Creating Lift
common in nature, and in fact, these shapes
Heavier-than-air flight is a frequently cited originally were borrowed from nature. Un-
example of lift. Lift, or the force that pushes a like the mechanical propeller, however, birds
wing upward, results from a difference in pres- and fish can change the shapes of their propel-
sure between the wing’s top and bottom sur- ling surfaces according to the needs of pro-
faces. Although it is possible for a flat object to pulsion: high-speed bursts, cruising, soaring,
function as a simple wing—for example, the and so on.
thin, balsa wood wings of toy gliders—shaping The motion of an airplane propeller through
and streamlining a wing in a certain way can a fluid is composed of a rotation about its axis
dramatically improve its aerodynamic and lift- together with the forward motion of the air-
ing qualities. craft so that the blades move forward on
An airfoil is a body (in this case, a wing) spirals. This spiral, or helicoidal, path is com-
designed to present a surface rounded and mon in locomotion in nature. The spiral-like
angled to the flowstream, creating maximum action has a distinct application to human
downwash and lift with minimum turbulence swimming propulsion, especially in butterfly
and drag. The gradual curvature of the airfoil and breaststroke swimming during transi-
produces a faster flow over its more rounded tional phases when the hands change direc-
upper surface that does not break away and tion.
form eddies. Reference has been made to the unique quali-
The wing’s shape—slightly cambered, with ties of the airfoil, a version of which is the
a blunt leading edge and a sharp trailing edge— propeller, but what is its application to swim-
causes faster air flow over the top than across ming? James Counsilman (1971) cites the Ber-
the bottom. This creates a lower average air noulli principle to show that during certain
pressure on top, producing enough lift to keep phases of the stroke, swimmers propel by using
an airplane aloft or, for that matter, a bird. This their hands and feet as foils to produce pre-
is how the airfoil scores over a flatter wing. dominant lift. Counsilman’s landmark presen-
Unlike a flat plate, an airfoil, with its humped tation was followed by numerous papers by
upper surface, produces lift even when the other observers contending that lift is produced
angle of attack is zero degrees. Further lift is by using hands and feet like propellers.
gained by increasing the angle of attack so that Fluid dynamic principles suggest, however,
the air meets the under surface at a steeper that although human swimmers sometimes
angle. A propeller works exactly as a wing use foil-like actions to propel, it is unlikely that
does by making use of the lift-producing prop- the mechanism used is exactly like that of a
erty of an airfoil but with this exception: an mechanical propeller or any other form of con-
airfoil used as a wing should produce the ventional airfoil. Studies of the flow reactions
maximum force at right angles to the direction produced by skilled swimmers indicate instead
of motion, but one used as a propeller should the use of unconventional mechanisms that
deliver a maximum force in the direction of albeit to a limited and modest extent, are basi-
motion. cally similar in principle to those observed in
The thrust of the propeller is obtained by nature. Before I develop this argument, how-
giving a backward velocity to the fluid with ever, the reader must understand the role of
which it comes in contact; to do this effec- flow circulation and why circulation is neces-
tively, the propeller blades are given first an sary to produce propulsion.

--- Page 97 Text ---
82 Breakthrough Swimming
The Role of Flow Circulation The Magnus Effect
in Lift Propulsion
The Magnus effect is the example commonly
used in fluid dynamics to explain how lift is
When a stream of fluid passes around a foil, the
created when circulation exists around a rotat-
flow over the convex upper surface has a greater
ing body in a uniform flowstream. If we could
velocity and, following the Bernoulli principle,
see a stream of fluid (air or water) flowing past
a lower pressure than that on the under surface;
a lifting foil, it would appear as if the fluid were
the difference in pressure between the two
actually circulating around it. Consider, for
creates lift (figure 4.3).
example, a horizontal revolving cylinder. When
the cylinder is immersed in a fluid and spun
counterclockwise around its axis, the surround-
ing fluid is set in motion and rotates with the
cylinder. This is called a bound vortex (figure
4.4).
Figure 4.3 Differences in flow pressure around
a foil create a lift force.
The Bernoulli principle can be demonstrated
simply by lightly dangling a tablespoon be-
tween finger and thumb and directing a jet of
Figure 4.4 Bound vortex forms around a rotating
tap water along its convex surface. Instead of
cylinder in a still fluid.
pushing the spoon away, the water draws it
into the jet. This experiment illustrates the drop
If a horizontal flow were now to stream from
in pressure that occurs when the speed of water
right to left, the combination of the counter-
increases. The shape of the spoon shows a
clockwise rotating fluid of the bound vortex
marked similarity to the wing of a bird or
and the horizontal flow would cause an in-
airplane, and in fact, all three behave like foils.
crease in the speed of the fluid above and a
Understanding Circulation decrease below. The net result would be a
decrease in pressure above and an increase
Circulation is a fundamental concept in fluid below—the usual Bernoulli effect—together
dynamics. Even a stone thrown through the air with an upwash in front and a downwash
has a circulation associated with it. Circulation behind. In effect, the spinning cylinder would
in the form of a bound vortex around a propel- be subjected to lift in the same way as an airfoil
ling member must exist before lift propulsion (figure 4.5). This phenomenon is known as the
can take place. The principle of circulation is Magnus effect. The resulting pressure differ-
not only the basis of airfoil design, but is valid ential causes the cylinder to move upward. It is
for bodies other than airfoils and applies to fish important to understand that without the rota-
propulsion, bird flight, and human swimming. tional flow of fluid (bound vortex) and its
In the case of a human swimmer, a bound superimposition on the flowstream there would
vortex appears as a rotating flow in circulation be no lifting force. A difference in pressure
around a hand, foot, or limb (Colwin 1984a). transverse to the direction of motion always

--- Page 98 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 83
exists, as we have seen, when a cylinder or with circulation even though the airfoil does
sphere rotates in a flow and so introduces not rotate.
circulation into a uniform stream. The Magnus This assumption must have seemed very
effect also explains the flight of a cut tennis ball dubious at the time, but we now know that any
or the swerving flight of a golf ball. kind of body must have circulation around it to
develop lift in a flowstream. Unless the body is
specially shaped, however, the circulation is
very feeble, and there is no lift. As I mentioned
earlier, an airfoil has a specially designed shape
that when the airfoil is propelled through a
fluid, generates a strong circulation without
causing a large drag. It is just this property that
enables propulsion without rotating surfaces
to create lift.
How an Airfoil Creates Circulation
We can now study airfoils as specially designed
Figure 4.5 Lift generated by a rotating cylinder
devices that do not need to rotate but are still
in horizontally moving flow.
able to create and maintain circulation. If we
could move with an undisturbed flowstream
Flow Circulation
and watch the fluid moving over an airfoil, the
and the Human Swimmer fluid would seem to circulate. The fluid mov-
ing upward and over the top of the airfoil flows
Although human limbs cannot develop lift pro- more quickly then the main flowstream,
pulsion in exactly the same manner as a revolv- whereas the fluid underneath flows more
ing cylinder, this basic example of the Magnus slowly; relatively speaking, the flow appears to
effect shows that lift depends on the presence move in a circle.
of a bound vortex around a propelling member The idea of relative flow around an airfoil is
that is superimposed on a flow. a different perception of circulation. In this
Later in this chapter, I’ll show how human case, the bound vortex is a mathematical con-
swimmers often generate lift during certain cept represented by the surface of the airfoil
phases of the swimming stroke by using this itself and not actually visible. The bound vor-
mechanism. The necessary flow circulation is tex around an airfoil is usually denoted as
developed mainly by directional changes of shown in figure 4.6.
the foil-shaped hand aided by a significant
degree of hand-forearm rotation particularly in
the arm actions of the butterfly and breastroke.
However, we first need to enlarge on the sub-
ject of circulation with specific reference to the
profile of the propelling member.
Lanchester’s Theory of Circulation
In the case of an airfoil, there is no source of
mechanical rotation so it is not obvious at first
sight how it develops lift by creating circula- Figure 4.6 A bound vortex around an airfoil is
tion. F.W. Lanchester (1907), with what proved a mathematical concept represented by the
to be amazing insight, took the bold step of profile of the airfoil itself and is not actually
assuming that an airfoil’s lift is associated visible.

--- Page 99 Text ---
84 Breakthrough Swimming
How a Starting Vortex Creates Experiments with a revolving cylinder in a
Circulation in the Form flow channel show the reappearance of the
starting vortex once the flow is switched off
of a Bound Vortex
and circulation has ceased. Right at the end, the
To see what happens when a foil starts to move starting vortex appears, almost like a movie
through a stationary fluid, hold a piece of in- played in reverse. In the strict technical sense,
clined cardboard in smoke and move it from rest. however, this vortex is known as the finishing,
You’ll see an eddy shed from its trailing edge or shed, vortex.
(figure 4.7). This is called a starting vortex, which It is provable mathematically that because a
is generated every time a foil starts its move- flow does not contain a circulation at the start of
ment. A starting vortex is also generated when a movement through it, it cannot contain a
the hand or foot of a skilled swimmer starts a circulation at the end of the movement. This
propulsive impulse in a particular direction. same principle applies to lift propulsion in
human swimming. The shed vortex at the end
of each propulsive impulse within a swimming
stroke indicates that the propulsive effort in
that particular direction has ended.
From the preceding it can be seen that any
lift-producing mechanism comprises the fol-
lowing three phases of vortex action:
1. The starting vortex
2. The bound vortex
3. The finishing vortex (also termed the
Figure 4.7 Eddies shed from the trailing edge of
shed, or free, vortex)
a moving foil.
Tip, or Trailing, Vortex
One of the rules of fluid dynamics is that a
vortex cannot be created without the produc- As well as providing lift, the difference in pres-
tion of a countervortex of equal strength circu- sure between the lower and upper surfaces of a
lating in the opposite direction (the principle of foil causes a related effect known as tip vortex,
conservation of angular momentum). In the or trailing vortex. Explained simply, tip vortex
case of an airfoil, the countervortex is in fact the results from the tendency of any fluid to flow
bound vortex, responsible for circulation and from high to low pressure. As there is no barrier
the production of lift, and it owes its continuing at the foil tips separating the high from the low
existence to the shearing forces over the sur- pressure areas, the fluid leaks from underneath
faces of the foil (figure 4.8). the foil to the top surface (figure 4.9). This flow,
or leakage, deflects the fluid on the top surface
slightly inward and that on the bottom surface
outward, introducing a third dimension to the
flow around the foil (figure 4.10).
The streams meeting at the foil’s trailing
edges cross one another to form a series of
small trailing vortices that join into one large
vortex at each foil tip. The energy used in the
formation of the vortex trail appears as the
induced drag. Obviously, to increase speed,
extra thrust is needed to overcome the resis-
Figure 4.8 Starting vortex and the production tance caused by induced drag (figure 4.11).
of its countervortex, the bound vortex. Even on a foil of finite span in steady motion,

--- Page 100 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 85
however, induced drag cannot be eliminated, ure 4.12). In these instances we know that lift is
for it is a necessary adjunct of lift. Similarly, a the predominant force acting on the swimmer’s
swimmer propelling with lift force predomi- hand at the start of the stroke. However, if a
nating always produces induced drag. Acci- swimmer’s hand enters the water and immedi-
dental flow aeration (entrapment of air in the ately pulls directly backward, a predominant
water) often produces visible evidence of trail- drag force is created, and instead of tip vortices,
ing vortices on a swimmer’s hands in the early a typical loop (elongated) vortex is shed from
stages of crawl, butterfly, and backstroke (fig- the hand early in the stroke.
Figure 4.9 As there is no barrier at the foil tips,
the fluid leaks from the high-pressure area beneath
Figure 4.10 Foil tip leakage introduces a third
the foil to the low-pressure area on the top surface.
dimension to the flow around the foil.
Figure 4.11 High- and low-pressure streams meet to form a vortex trail.
Figure 4.12 Trailing (tip) vortices are often shed from a swimmer’s hands in the early stages of the
crawl, butterfly, and backstroke pull.

--- OCR from Page 100 Image 2 ---
Low-pressure air = black

High-pressure air = white

--- OCR from Page 100 Image 3 ---
Upper wing surface
near tip Low-pressure air

High-pressure air

--- Page 101 Text ---
86 Breakthrough Swimming
The Organized Vortex System differential necessary for lift. In this case, the lift
is upward, causing a high position of the upper
The term organized vortex system refers to pro-
body in the water but not contributing directly
pulsion developed by foil-type lift with a bound
to propulsion.
vortex in place and trailing vortices springing
As the hand moves further into the stroke it
from the tip of the foil. As mentioned earlier, a
assumes an angle favorable to producing for-
propeller is a rotating foil or wing. When lift is
ward-inclined lift. This position lasts only a
uniformly distributed along its blade span, an
short while, however. Most skilled swimmers
organized vortex system exists. Similarly, when
establish steady flow propulsion (with an orga-
swimmers use the hand like an airfoil, an orga-
nized vortex system) at the beginning of the
nized vortex system will exist.
stroke. But subsequent directional changes of
hand and limb cause increased angles of attack
Foil-Type Propulsion
that quickly lead to quasisteady, then nonsteady,
in Steady Flow Conditions
flow. In crawl, butterfly, and backstroke, it soon
becomes difficult to continue developing lift
The use of foil-type lift propulsion, in the strict-
circulation by means of the conventional airfoil
est sense of the term, is limited to steady flow
lift-producing mechanism because the chang-
conditions in which the flow pattern does not
ing postures of the hand cause too large an
change over time. Such is the case for a conven-
angle of attack.
tional airfoil lift-producing mechanism. This
The hand and forearm action in swimming
means that the foil must be positioned at an
propulsion has been likened to that of a propel-
angle of attack that results in a steady circulat-
ler blade. But the 360-degree rotation around an
ing flow over its surface.
axis of a mechanical propeller is anatomically
If the foil’s angle of attack becomes too large,
impossible for a hand. An airfoil can maintain
the flow detaches from it, breaks up, and be-
an angle of attack that produces continuous
comes unsteady, causing a loss of the vortex
steady flow circulation. But photographs taken
circulation necessary for creating lift. This phe-
in a wind tunnel show what happens to the flow
nomenon is called stall.
reaction around a cranked plate (a type of foil)
Airfoils are designed to create the steady
as the angle of attack is changed. The flow
flow circulation that causes constant lift pro-
changes from steady to quasisteady and then to
pulsion. Lift may be generated in any direction.
unsteady. Under unsteady flow conditions, ideal
A swimmer’s arm can be used as a swimming
foil-type lift becomes impossible.
foil, if angled properly (figure 4.13); for ex-
The onset of unsteady flow conditions is
ample, as a crawl swimmer’s arm enters the
marked by the tendency of the vortex trail to
water with the elbow set higher than the wrist,
swell and start to burst. If the foil’s angle of
its cambered upper surface causes the oncom-
attack continues to increase, the vortex trail
ing flow to move more quickly over the upper
detaches from the foil, indicating that circula-
surface of the arm and more slowly along the
tion has been lost and that an organized vortex
lower surface. The different flow velocities over
system is no longer in place. Foil-type propul-
the upper and lower arm produce the pressure
sion, in its accepted sense, has terminated. Simi-
larly, when a swimmer’s hand approaches too
large an angle of attack, conventional foil-type
propulsion is no longer possible.
The illustrations of an Olympic butterfly
champion show reactions similar to those around
a cranked plate in the wind tunnel (figure 4.14).
This is not a unique observation, for the flow
Figure 4.13 Different flow velocities over the reactions produced by skilled swimmers consis-
upper and lower arm produce a pressure tently indicate that human swimming propul-
differential. sion takes place in conditions of unsteady flow.

--- Page 102 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 87
is very small. The smooth characteristics and
lift of steady flow are established only after the
airfoil has moved about ten chords (a chord is
the width of the foil from leading edge to trail-
ing edge) from its starting point. The interaction
between opposing currents of air (or fluid) that
delays the creation of steady lift is called the
Wagner effect and contributes an unavoidable
nonsteady phase in the action of normal air-
foils. A swimmer’s hand is not in the water at an
ideal angle of attack long enough to obtain
constant lift in the manner of an airfoil.
The question, then, is whether lift-force pro-
pulsion can be developed in unsteady flow
Right hand is pitched at Left hand is pitched at
conditions. It can, but the lift-producing mecha-
too large an angle of ideal angle of attack.
nism is an unconventional one that does not
attack, causing trailing Thin trailing vortices are
vortex to swell and start characteristic of steady require the propelling member to be placed at
to burst. Trailing vortex flow. Vortex sheet is an ideal angle of attack.
is about to detach from seen as dark area The lift force generated by a foil is directly
hand, indicating foil- between trailing
proportional to the foil’s surface area and the
type lift is ending (see vortices.
density of the fluid in which it is moving.
inset figure).
Given that the density of water is 800 times the
Figure 4.14 Butterfly stroke, quasisteady flow
density of air, the human hand moving in
(right hand) and steady flow (left hand). Adapted
water generates a force equal to that generated
from photos courtesy of James E. Counsilman.
by a surface 800 times its size moving in air at
the same speed. Because the lift force gener-
Propulsion in Nonsteady Flow ated by a foil is directly proportional to the
square of its speed through the fluid, a 40
The essential problem, hitherto ignored in ana- percent increase in the speed of the hand when
lytical studies of human swimming, is that employed as a foil can almost double the pro-
swimming propulsion occurs mainly in un- pulsive force generated.
steady flow. There can be no doubt about this; In swimming, lift-force propulsion is devel-
the stroke mechanics of even the most skilled oped in unsteady flow primarily by the direc-
swimmers consistently produce unsteady flow tional changes of the foil-shaped hand as it
reactions because a swimmer’s hand, as it trav- moves through the stroke. The gradual rota-
els through a wide range of movement, quickly tion of the hand and forearm as a unit as the
assumes too large an angle of attack for steady stroke progresses is an important part of this
flow to continue. Although an airfoil, which is lift-producing mechanism. In all the styles of
specifically designed for the purpose, can main- swimming, the stroke commences with the palm
tain the ideal angle of attack to produce the facing outward (to lesser or greater degrees,
steady flow necessary for constant lift propul- depending on the flexibility of the individual
sion, a swimmer cannot use the hand like a swimmer). As the arm reaches midstroke, the
conventional foil throughout a swimming elbow reaches maximum flexion at plus or
stroke. The action of the hand in the swimming minus 90 degrees, thus indicating a consider-
strokes simply cannot be compared with steady able amount of hand-forearm rotation since the
state aerodynamics. stroke commenced.
Another important reason why the hand does As stated, it is the rotating hand-forearm
not operate as a conventional airfoil is that at the unit, moving laterally or transversely across
start of an airfoil’s movement (for example, an the line of the body’s forward movement, that
airplane at takeoff), the net lift around the airfoil generates lift. This action causes a pressure

--- Page 103 Text ---
88 Breakthrough Swimming
differential in the flow, which in turn sets up the
flow circulation around the hand and forearm
necessary for lift to occur. As the arm bends and a
the hand and forearm gradually rotate, the
flow is swirled or wrapped around the hand
and forearm. This swirling flow constitutes the
bound vortex, or circulation, whose superim-
b
position on the general flow is necessary for lift.
As the arm extends again and the final propel-
ling thrust of the stroke is applied, this circulat-
ing flow is gradually unswirled or unwrapped
from the arm in the form of a shed vortex.
As already explained, directional changes of
the hand combine with a significant range of
hand-forearm rotation to set up the mechanism
c
necessary for creating flow circulation. These
flows are readily visible in shadowgram tests
Figure 4.15 Typical flow reactions: (a) drag
conducted at low speeds, when the flow is not
propulsion (pulling directly backward);
too compressed to be easily seen.
(b) conventional airfoil method; and (c) outward
You may conduct similar tests by simply
and inward sculling (curvilinear pulling patterns,
moving a spoon or any other suitable foil-
especially in butterfly and breaststroke). In the
shaped object through the appropriate direc-
inward and outward scull, there are always leading
tions in a container of water. If you have a
edge and trailing edge vortices around the hand.
strong overhead light and the bottom of the
tank is white, you’ll see the shadow cast by the
resulting vortex on the bottom of the tank and The Significance of the Shed Vortex
be able to note the different flow reactions
A vortex is shed whenever a propulsive im-
produced by rectilinear and curvilinear move-
pulse ends. The analysis of these vortex pat-
ments. This simple test shows distinct differ-
terns produced by each swimming stroke pro-
ences between the flow reactions set up by
vides a new perspective from which to view
drag propulsion (pulling directly backward),
swimming efficiency. The pattern of shed vor-
the conventional airfoil mechanism, and a cur-
tices a swimmer leaves in the water provides an
vilinear pulling pattern (figures 4.15a, 4.15b,
instant history of the swimming stroke, be-
and 4.15c).
cause each propulsive impulse within the over-
Vortex Reactions in Producing Lift all stroke produces a distinctive type of vortex
as its signature.
Essentially, fluid dynamics as applied to lift- Recognizable patterns reveal how individual
force propulsion in swimming comprises a swimmers apply their power. By its size, shape,
three-fold sequence of events: direction, velocity, and placement in the flow
field in relation to the swimming stroke, the
1. At the start of a propulsive impulse, a
shed vortex reveals the type of propulsive
starting vortex produces a bound vortex
mechanism the swimmer has used and the net
around a hand, foot, or limb.
effectiveness of the propulsive impulse just
2. The bound vortex is then manipulated
completed.
in such a way as to enable lift force to be
applied.
Kinetic Energy
3. When circulation (in the form of a bound
vortex) can no longer be produced and A shed vortex represents a form of kinetic
maintained, a vortex is shed, indicating energy, or in other words, the energy of motion.
that the propulsive impulse has ended. We know that energy cannot be created or

--- Page 104 Text ---
Understanding Hydrodynamics 89
destroyed, but it can be transferred from one in the swimming stroke; nevertheless, it was
type to another. Energy is transferred from the possible to form a synthesis of the flow reac-
swimmer to the water in the form of kinetic tions that could be anticipated during key
energy whenever a vortex is shed. (In fact, phases of propulsion. More recently, I have
energy is being changed from one form into noted the advantages of underwater video re-
another whenever work is done or energy ex- cordings of swimmers during actual competi-
pended.) Vortices shed at random and not at tion. When swimming at speed, most swim-
the end of a propulsive impulse indicate wasted mers accidentally entrap enough air into the
energy that a swimmer is not applying to the water to make the flow reactions almost con-
water in the most effective manner. tinuously visible.
I systematically compared these observa-
Studying Flow Reactions tions with fluid dynamic theory as well as with
to the Swimming Stroke the theory that relates to lift propulsion in
nature. I was especially interested in seeking
I conducted a study that sought to identify flow reasons for what initially appeared to be un-
reactions common to the stroke mechanics of usual vortex formations that indicated propul-
world-class swimmers. A methodical analysis sion was taking place in nonsteady flow.
of underwater movies, slides, and photographs Although airfoils are designed to develop
consistently revealed similar patterns of vortic- steady flow, human swimming propulsion,
ity (Colwin 1984a). because of anatomical restrictions, must em-
By correlating commonly observed flow re- ploy directional changes of the limbs that cause
actions with established fluid dynamic prin- nonsteady flow. I believe that skilled human
ciples—particularly those concerning lift pro- swimmers, like birds, fish, and certain flying
pulsion—I attempted to establish a basis for insects, are able to turn nonsteady flow to ad-
further study. The flow visibility was not al- vantage by using dexterous movements that
ways complete because observation depended establish the necessary flow circulation through
largely on accidental air entrapment (aeration) the rapid generation and shedding of vortices.

--- Page 106 Text ---
Chapter 5
Propulsive
Mechanisms
of Speed Swimming
The dynamics of all the swimming
strokes cause fluctuating flow con-
ditions because the continual direc-
tional changes of the hands are not
conducive to maintaining steady
flow. Although most skilled swim-
mers establish steady state propul-
sion with organized vortex systems
at the beginning of a stroke, subse-
quent hand and limb directional
changes quickly lead to a sequence
of quasisteady to nonsteady peri-
ods. These changes are often diffi-
cult for some swimmers to accom-
plish without losing propulsion.
However, underwater photography
of skilled swimmers indicates that
the shedding of large separate vor-
tices occurs at approximately the
same time as the hand’s directional
change.
In this chapter, we learn that pro-
pulsion in fluids is not limited to
propellers and other purely me-
chanical means. To this end, we com-
pare human swimming propulsion
with the quick generating and shed-
ding of vortices used by birds, fly-
ing insects, and marine animals in
order to propel, and we find that
human hands and feet function as
91

--- Page 107 Text ---
92 Breakthrough Swimming
swim foils using mechanisms similar to those quent shedding of the new vortex—albeit a some-
common in nature. This information is applied what smaller one—at the end of the stroke.
directly to coaching a swimmer to use the react-
ing pressure resistance in the flow to generate An Alternative Lift-Generating
quick propulsion through the water. Mechanism
The Hand as a Swim Foil The quick generating and shedding of vortices
just described is a propulsive mechanism preva-
A shed vortex indicates that a propulsive im- lent in nature. This alternative lift-generating
pulse in a particular direction has ended. World- mechanism, unlike that of the conventional
ranked swimmers are invariably observed to airfoil, is independent of foil shape and the
shed a large vortex during a change of hand existence of an ideal angle of attack. Instead, lift
direction; these great athletes may be showing is established when a circulation (bound vor-
the ideal way to propel. Acceleration to top swim- tex) around the propelling member is superim-
ming speed requires sharp directional changes of posed on the general flow. (The role of flow
the hand instead of the smooth, rounded transi- circulation in lift propulsion is discussed exten-
tions seen at slower speeds. However, vortex sively in chapter 4.)
shedding before a propulsive impulse has ended Careful study reveals different types of vor-
is often a sign of inefficient technique. tex patterns in the flow field (figure 5.1). The
Common causes of prematurely shed vortices vortex pattern developed depends on the natu-
are holding the hand too rigidly on the wrist or ral aptitude of the swimmer and the speed at
too sudden a directional change combined with which the swimmer is moving. Drawings
excessive acceleration and application of force. adapted from films confirm that an organized
In high-speed swimming every stroke consists vortex system is longer at slower swimming
of distinct impulses that accelerate with each speeds (figure 5.2).
change of hand direction. After a vortex is shed High-speed swimming may cause sharp
at the end of an impulse, a new vortex is quickly changes in hand direction with shedding of
generated around the hand as it changes direc- ring vortices at the end of each propulsive
tion. Proof of this can often be seen in the subse- impulse (figure 5.2a). A large ring vortex is
Figure 5.1 Different vortex patterns.

--- OCR from Page 107 Image 1 ---
2s Fe Gd

Be eceri

--- Page 108 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 93
a b c
Figure 5.2 Vortex shedding reveals the effects of different stroke patterns.
shed as the hand changes direction in midstroke. made to the articulation of the hand on the
The trailing vortices detach from the hand, wrist. A swimmer who possesses a natural feel
indicating that the organized vortex system of the water uses the hand to perform a dual
has ceased and that propulsion is no longer by function by directing and channeling the flow
foil-type lift. The remaining vorticity in circula- circulation while also applying propulsive
tion around the hand is shed at the end of the thrust. In fact, the dexterous functioning of the
stroke by the fling-ring mechanism. entire arm in an undulating fashion, almost in
Smoother and rounder directional changes the manner of an elongated flipper, is quite
are achieved more easily at submaximal hand noticeable. Talented swimmers show unusual
speed (figure 5.2b). Single-impulse propulsion dexterity, particularly during transitional
and smooth hand acceleration help maintain an phases of the stroke, and create remarkably
organized vortex system for most of the stroke. consistent vortex patterns in the flow field.
In the final stage of the stroke, the vortex tail
becomes unsteady and starts to burst as a single Comparing Swimming
vortex ring is shed by the fling-ring mechanism.
to Propulsion in Nature
By applying excessive power or accelerating
the hand too rapidly, even top swimmers may
Comparisons between human swimming and
shed random vortices (figure 5.2c). Spasmodic
fluid dynamic propulsion in nature are appro-
vortex shedding represents kinetic energy lost
priate because the two share similar difficulties
to the water and is also characteristic of poor
in coping with nonsteady flow. In fact, the
directional control of the hand. Excessive vor-
similarities observed among the most diverse
tex shedding is common, which suggests that
phenomena of fluid motion are not accidental
overapplying propulsive force and failing to
but constitute a universal law of nature. Thus,
accelerate the hand smoothly are more preva-
it makes sense to compare examples from na-
lent faults than generally recognized. These
ture with human swimming propulsion.
habits may account for subpar performance
even when an athlete feels strong and powerful. Comparisons With Bird Flight
The Dual Function of the Hand Lift-force propulsion is based on aerodynamic
principles that originated in Lilienthal’s (1889)
Although the literature contains frequent dis- intensive observations of bird flight. Similarly,
cussions of the elbow’s changing posture dur- it’s highly probable that skilled swimmers use
ing the swimming stroke, little reference is methods of developing lift (in conjunction with

--- Page 109 Text ---
94 Breakthrough Swimming
drag) during nonsteady periods of propulsion Until recently, standard aerodynamics had
similar to those that occur in nature. failed to explain how birds and insects over-
Aircraft and the majority of flying creatures come these handicaps. But, with the help of
fly in what might be called a standard way, high-speed photography, the mystery is now
using well-understood aerodynamic principles. near a solution.
But small birds and flying insects fly in a man-
The Rapid Generating
ner that can’t be explained in simple aerody-
namic terms. We know that aircraft depend on and Shedding of Vortices
airfoils that move through the air steadily.
Birds and insects apparently employ mecha-
Nonsteady flows around aircraft wings must
nisms that swiftly establish air circulation
be minimized because they reduce flight effi-
around their wings, entailing the rapid gener-
ciency. In contrast, nonsteady aerodynamics
ating and shedding of vortices. By so doing,
are an inherent feature of natural flapping flight.
they are able to generate lift more quickly than
The subtleties of oscillating, or flapping, wing
would be possible in steady airflow. This dis-
movement are still not fully understood, but
covery cast an entirely new light on the prob-
bird flight in its simplest form—gliding or soar-
lems that had long perplexed observers of bird
ing—does not require flapping or the consump-
and insect flight. The examples of aerodynamic
tion of muscle power. Simply by stretching out
propulsion in nature provide valid compari-
the wing, the outer part merges with the arm
sons with human swimming propulsion, which
section to form a continuous plane so that the
also has to cope with the problem of propelling
bird flies in a manner similar to a fixed-wing
in nonsteady flow.
aircraft. This use of steady flow is similar to the
way in which a swimmer spreads the arms
Unsteady Flow in Nature
sideways during the beginning phase of the
butterfly and breaststroke arm actions. Most of our present knowledge of the flying
The spreading of the arms is one of the most characteristics of birds and flying insects has
economical movements in swimming, particu- been gained by direct observation, aided by
larly in the butterfly stroke. It’s also a remark- slow-motion photography. Their motion bears
able simulation of natural flight. In fact, I like to an interesting comparison to some phases of
instruct young swimmers to imagine they are human swimming propulsion, most notably
giant condors with wings outstretched, launch- the butterfly arm action, which uses directional
ing themselves from a high cliff into an oncom- changes of the hands in a path transverse to the
ing sea breeze. When the start of the butterfly swimmer’s forward direction. When this type
arm stroke is properly timed, this form of sub- of arm action is accompanied by a marked
aqueous flying (a term sometimes used to de- degree of hand-forearm rotation, it is probable
scribe sea-lion propulsion) develops high body that the necessary flow circulation is produced
velocity and is aided by the momentum devel- for predominant lift-force propulsion to occur.
oped a split-second earlier from the downward When observing propulsion in unsteady flow
thrust of the dolphin kick, another derivation in nature, it is important to note that the neces-
from nature. sary bound vortex is created by mechanisms
This steady flow phase of the arm action is that operate intermittently in timing with the
present at the beginning of all four swimming directions of the oscillating wing. As each pro-
styles. During this phase, an organized vortex pulsive impulse ends, a vortex is shed.
system is in place, as shown by the presence of An expert swimmer propels by means of
tip vortices coming off the hands. As the stroke directional changes of the hands, which cause
changes direction, however, it becomes difficult the rapid generating and shedding of vortices.
to maintain steady flow and to continue to use In butterfly and breaststroke, this mechanism
the hand in an airfoil fashion. This is also true of is probably similar in principle to the oscillat-
the flapping (oscillating) wing. Because of ana- ing wing but only to the extent that the quick
tomical structure, birds and insects are unable changes of hand direction generate the flow
to maintain a constant production of lift. circulation necessary to produce lift-force pro-

--- Page 110 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 95
pulsion. But, there the similarity to bird flight borne. Their unique lift-generating mechanisms
ends. Apart from possessing a basically similar instead depend on means different from those
skeletal structure, the human arm bears not of ordinary foils; the actual shape of the foil is
even a remote resemblance to a bird’s wing, nor of little importance. What is needed is an elon-
does it flap while it propels. gated body that carries a bound vortex and is
moved relative to the stationary fluid. It does
Comparisons With Propulsion not involve refined adjustments of the angle of
attack but does require rapid control of the flow
of Marine Animals
over the tip of the foil.
Marine animals, fish, and birds are highly spe-
The Clap-Fling-Ring Mechanism
cialized for propulsion in their respective fluid
mediums. At the outset, we may find it difficult Some flying insects use a clap-fling-ring action
to imagine how the human swimmer could of their wings, which circulates air to form a
possibly adopt any examples at all from nature, vortex on each wing tip (figure 5.3). At the end
but consider the dolphin kick used in the but- of the downstroke these two vortices are shed
terfly stroke, developed in 1935 by Jack Sieg
and his coach David Armbruster. Based on the
movement of the dolphin’s tail, the dolphin
kick represents the most effective attempt so
far by humans to adopt a swimming technique
from nature. Yet, despite the natural ease with
which the dolphin kick fits in with the butterfly
arm action, certain limitations in the human
physique prevent the butterfly swimmer from
completely emulating the harmonious loco-
motion displayed by the dolphin.
The main difference between the natural
action of the dolphin and the acquired dolphin
kick of the human swimmer is that the dolphin
can perform the upbeat of its fluke, or tail, more
quickly than the downbeat. The upbeat of the
dolphin fluke is also faster than the upbeat of a
swimmer’s feet at equal movement frequen-
cies. This is because the dolphin’s musculature
is more suited to producing a stronger move-
ment on the upstroke of its fluke. The traces of
the dolphin’s fluke appear to be more sym-
metrical than those of human swimmers
(Ungerechts 1983).
Comparisons With the Flight
of Flying Insects
The most fascinating aerodynamic discovery
of recent times has a counterpart in nonsteady
swimming propulsion. It concerns the novel
lift-generating mechanism used by some flying
insects (Lighthill 1973). Aerodynamic calcula-
tions have shown that some insects are unable Figure 5.3 Clap-fling-ring mechanism of
to generate enough foil-type lift to remain air- butterfly flight.

--- OCR from Page 110 Image 1 ---
DR, aw
— > P<e
SS”

--- Page 111 Text ---
96 Breakthrough Swimming
in a flinging action and combine to form one tive the kick. I have often asked butterfly swim-
large vortex ring directly beneath the insect. mers to swim a few strokes and then stop and
The force needed to create the ring sustains the look back underwater at their still-visible vor-
insect’s weight. tex trails. They were fascinated that they could
The difference between a normal airfoil and actually see the result of their propulsion.
the nonsteady fling-ring mechanism is that the
vortex patterns leading to circulation are cre-
ated prior to and independent of the movement
of the foil through the fluid (Weis-Fogh 1973).
The Fling-Ring Mechanism
in the Dolphin Kick
Obviously it is impossible for human swim-
mers to perform the clap phase that precedes
the fling-ring mechanism. However, they may
use similar mechanisms during nonsteady
swimming propulsion. A typical example can
be seen in the power dolphin kick when used at
maximum effort. (The kick in the following
description should not be confused with the
gentler action of the soft dolphin kick, often
used in the 200-meter event, which is more like
a foil operating in steady flow.)
The power dolphin kick requires a rapidly
established vortex circulation, in this case
Figure 5.4 The fling-ring propulsive mechanism
around the feet, prior to commencing the pro-
in the power dolphin kick.
pulsive impulse. This is accomplished in a
manner slightly different from the clap-fling-
ring mechanism used by some flying insects. Sometimes, when a swimmer’s feet have
In the absence of the preliminary clap phase spread too far apart during the downward
of the mechanism, the soles of the feet set up the thrust, two smaller vortices, one from each
necessary preliminary circulation as they touch foot, will be shed. The effectiveness of this
the surface of the water prior to the feet starting action is not as great as when a large single
downward. The contact by the soles with the vortex is shed.
surface water sets up a surface tension caused The use of the fling-ring lift effect in the
by molecular attraction between the two fluids, power dolphin kick depends largely on a
water and air. As the feet thrust downward, a swimmer’s ability to hyperextend the ankles
bound vortex forms around each foot. These and feet quickly to establish surface tension.
vortices combine to form one large vortex ring Circulation results from the impulsive force
that is shed in the vertical plane as the feet created by the feet as they separate the air-
complete a powerful downward thrust (figure water boundary.
5.4). The large size of the ring indicates that a
The Fling-Ring Mechanism
large mass of water has been acted on, whereas
the velocity of the water has remained rela- in the Two-Beat Crawl Kick
tively low. One indication of the dolphin kick’s and the Breaststroke Kick
effectiveness is the distance between the regu-
larly spaced vortices: The greater the distance Crawl swimmers using a power-producing
between each shed vortex ring, the more effec- two-beat kick also employ the fling-ring

--- Page 112 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 97
mechanism. Shed vortices of a smaller size can off and circulation has ceased. Right at the end,
often be observed in the vertical plane behind the starting vortex reappears, almost like a
each foot as it completes its downward thrust. movie film played in reverse.
For instance, this effect can be seen in the Similarly, it can be seen that a vortex must be
women’s 1,500-meter event, in which the use shed if the hand is brought to a complete stop
of the two-beat kick usually predominates. with respect to the local flow because there is
Each swimmer in the race often leaves a lad- no longer a mechanism producing and main-
der of small separate vortices trailing in the taining circulation. So, during a swimming
lane behind her. stroke, when the hand stops or completes a
Underwater movies of breaststroke swim- propulsive impulse in a certain direction, what-
mers show that the essential preliminary flow ever circulation is bound on it is shed to form a
circulation is set up by the dorsi-flexion of the vortex ring.
feet, combined with their change of direction, The reader can easily demonstrate these
as they move from recovery into the propul- phenomena. Stand in shallow water, dip your
sive phase. That the breaststroke kick uses the hand into the water, and move your hand; the
fling-ring lift mechanism can be seen when a rapidly formed starting vortex appears. Now
breaststroke swimmer misjudges the depth of end the movement by stopping the hand sud-
a push off from a turn and inadvertently intro- denly, which causes a shed vortex visibly whirl-
duces air into the kick. The resultant aeration ing away rapidly from the hand.
of the flow reveals vortex rings behind each
What is the ideal shape of a shed vortex?
foot as the first kick off the wall is completed,
a clear demonstration that the kick uses the A shed vortex should be circular rather than
fling-ring mechanism. elongated because a circular vortex acts on a
larger area or mass of fluid. Its velocity is
Practical Application of Flow slower than that of an elongated vortex, which
acts on a smaller area and a smaller mass.
Analysis as a Coaching Tool
Although an elongated vortex (long loop) pro-
duces a flow causing forward thrust, this is not
The following discussion is couched in question
the most efficient mode of propulsion, for the
and answer format. I am frequently asked these
reason just stated. The elongated vortex usu-
questions in conversation and correspondence.
ally results from predominant drag propulsion
What is a vortex? when the hand is pulled straight backward like
a paddle instead of in a curved path like a foil
A vortex is a mass of fluid that rotates about an
(figure 5.5). The vortex is shed from both sides
axis. The axis of the vortex may be in almost any
of the hand and arm and appears early in the
plane from vertical to horizontal.
stroke.
What causes a vortex to be shed
at the end of a propulsive impulse? What should be the ideal plane
of a shed vortex?
The presence of a bound vortex is essential for
lift to occur. When a starting vortex is formed, Refer to the example of the circular vortex and
it causes a bound vortex to be closed around assume, for the time being, that we have a
a foil. Because a flow does not contain any swimmer who can produce this perfectly
circulation at the beginning of a stroke, it must shaped circular vortex. Again, a vortex is a
not contain any circulation at the end of a mass of fluid rotating about an axis that may be
stroke. in almost any plane. Let us orient the plane of
For example, experiments with a rotating this circular vortex at different angles, from
cylinder in a flow channel show the reappear- vertical to horizontal.
ance of the starting vortex, now rotating in the When the plane of this circular vortex is
opposite direction, once the flow is switched vertical and its axis is horizontal, all the fluid

--- Page 113 Text ---
98 Breakthrough Swimming
particles the vortex acts on will be moved in the
stream direction (the horizontal direction),
which results in ideal direct forward propul-
sion. When the plane of the vortex is horizon-
tal, or lying parallel to the surface of the water,
all the fluid particles that this vortex acts on
will be directed downward, meaning that the
net force created by the swimmer is upward
rather than forward.
The conclusion is that if a swimmer’s stroke
is efficient, the plane of the shed vortex tends to
be vertical or nearly vertical. The more vertical
the vortex plane, the more likely the propulsive
impulse has generated near maximum forward
thrust.
What do different size vortices in the flow
field tell us?
Counsilman (1971) states that it’s better to move
a large mass of water a short distance than to
move a small mass of water a long way. In terms
of propeller theory, this idea could be expressed
as “it’s better to move a large mass of water
slowly than to move a small mass quickly.”
Stated thus, the principles of propeller theory
apply directly to swimming propulsion.
In another of his prominent studies, Counsil-
man (1980) showed that skilled swimmers pro-
duce marked hand acceleration in the latter
phase of the crawl, a finding borne out by
analysis of the flow reaction. A smaller vortex
appears after the end of the stroke, whereas a
larger vortex appears during the stroke, when
a b
the first propulsive impulse of the stroke is
Figure 5.5 Predominant drag propulsion: flow completed (as the elbow reaches maximum
reactions. (a) The flow reaction shows drag force flexion). The smaller vortex at the end of the
propulsion resulting from pulling directly stroke shows an increase in the flow velocity
backward. All organized vorticity is shed very early caused by the hand’s acceleration.
in the stroke. (b) The typical lasso-type vortex It may be that the first, larger vortex creates
consists of a short vortex trail attached to a large a new flow direction and the hand may have to
ring. The stroke is completed with wake turbulence move faster to make maximum use of the new
behind the hand. Sometimes this action is shown flow velocity. The skilled swimmer may be
by early detachment of the trailing vortex without aware of this—albeit subconsciously—and ad-
the presence of a ring. just the hand accordingly.

--- OCR from Page 113 Image 2 ---
Re,

¥ ~,
oa
if

goa

CPRI TOE

--- Page 114 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 99
What does the presence of excessive The flow patterns of great swimmers at key
vorticity mean? phases of propulsion are remarkably predict-
able. When observing these top performers, it’s
A coach can learn a great deal from a swimmer’s
not difficult to form a synthesis of the flow
subjective comments, especially immediately
patterns that can be anticipated. Nevertheless,
after a race. Sometimes, when a swimmer has
we lack a sophisticated method of flow visual-
turned in a particularly fine performance, the
ization that enables vortex reactions to be mea-
swimmer may say, “I felt so good that I could
sured accurately against a grid. Ideally, such a
have gone faster,” or, conversely, a swimmer
method would require front- and side-view
may express disappointment at a recorded time
photography of swimmers at racing speed. The
by saying, “I felt so strong and powerful—I
side views should be photographed by an un-
can’t understand why my time wasn’t faster.”
derwater camera moving on a track and
As has been observed underwater, very pow-
kept constantly abreast of the swimmer; where
erful swimmers often shed vortices in the
access to a swimming flume is available, the
middle of a propulsive impulse, which shows
swimmer could be filmed while tethered in an
they are exerting more power than necessary.
oncoming flow. Comparing the results pro-
In contrast, the swimmer who finishes with
duced by the two approaches would add an-
power in reserve, feeling it was possible to go
other dimension to flow analysis.
faster, perhaps instinctively has not overapplied
power.
Should swimmers entrap air into their
There could be another reason for excessive
strokes to make the flow reactions visible?
vortex shedding, however. As the hand ex-
Intentional aeration is not a good idea because
ceeds the ideal angle of attack (in terms of the
under certain conditions, air entrapment can
conventional airfoil mechanism), the flow sepa-
cause bursting bubbles that may increase drag.
rates, destroying the circulation. At this stage a
Although air entrapment should not be en-
swimmer will start to use unconventional pro-
couraged, the introduction of a bubble can
pulsive mechanisms to propel in the resulting
improve efficiency sometimes, when a bubble
unsteady flow. One reason for excessive vortex
attaches to the upper surface of a foil, causing
activity, then, could be that the swimmer can no
a modified contour that prevents massive sepa-
longer adjust the hand incidence so as to main-
ration of the flow.
tain airfoil-type propulsion and thus has to
shed the existing flow circulation to establish a
new flow around the hand. Shaping the Flow
Why is it not always possible to see the Little is known about the effects of body shape
swimmer’s flow reactions in the water? on a swimmer’s efficiency. The bulky, squat
The presence of visible flow reactions depends body type has not been as prevalent in competi-
on accidental air entrapment. Aeration is a tive swimming as it once was. Most of the
recognized visualization technique used by leading swimmers, irrespective of their events,
fluid dynamicists. Although most swimmers are tall and lithe, with a lean physique like a
produce a visible flow reaction when swim- basketball player’s. Their muscles tend to be
ming at speed, no procedure ensures regular long rather than short and heavy like a
visualization of the surrounding flow field. weightlifter’s.
Several flow visualization methods are used to The effects of a swimmer’s shape and physi-
analyze the flow around models in flow chan- cal proportions on speed and efficiency are
nels and wind tunnels, but the use of dyes, governed by the ratio of height to bulk, among
lasers, smoke, and so on could pose a safety other important factors. The more slender the
hazard for swimmers. Up to now, photogra- swimmer, the less the underwater volume com-
phy, especially shadow photography, has pro- pared to the swimmer’s height, or length, in the
vided promising results. water. If a swimmer has a gradually tapering

--- Page 115 Text ---
100 Breakthrough Swimming
physique, water will flow past more easily. In efficient crawl and backstroke swimming,
Other variables include buoyancy, body com- the alternating action of the arms ensures that
position, flexibility, neuromuscular patterns, at nearly every stage of the stroke cycle one arm
and individual aptitude. extends forward at entry to intercept and
However, the shapes of certain human body smoothly channel the oncoming flow while the
types (somatotypes) are at a distinct disadvan- other arm completes its stroke. In butterfly and
tage in speed swimming. Observation of the breaststroke, however, because the arms move
water’s flow reactions around individual swim- simultaneously, such nearly constant intercep-
mers confirms this. tion of the oncoming flow at entry is not pos-
Some swimmers have extreme difficulty con- sible. Moreover, some butterfly and breaststroke
trolling the oncoming flow of water along the swimmers have difficulty controlling the on-
entering arm(s) with sufficient continuity to coming flow around the arms at the beginning
obtain the best timing of the stroke. The more of each stroke because the momentum neces-
successful swimmers appear to be favorably sary to produce this oncoming flow depends
endowed by nature with streamlined body pro- on accurate timing between the arm and leg
files and functional limb shapes that enable actions.
them to continuously control the oncoming
flow between one stroke and the next. Exploiting Examples
In all four styles of swimming, the arms at From Nature
the start of the stroke should act much like the
bow of a ship, channeling the oncoming flow I have described how humans developed their
along each arm and around the body. admittedly limited swimming ability. Through
The crawl permits a skilled swimmer to considerable invention and the gradual acqui-
smoothly control the oncoming flow as one sition of increasing skill, we learned to adapt
stroke ends and the next one commences. The our comparatively awkward land-living bod-
overlapping arm action of the crawl stroke ies for efficient use in water.
allows a swimmer to feel the oncoming flow of Earlier, I made a comparison between hu-
water advance along the entry arm at the same man swimming and similar propulsive mecha-
time as the opposite arm is unswirling the flow nisms in nature. Is it possible to improve the
from the hand and forearm at the finish of its efficiency of human swimming by seeking out
stroke. The expert crawl swimmer is thus able and adopting further examples from nature?
to control simultaneously two separate flow Can we learn to use propulsive mechanisms
reactions during this fleeting but critical timing and postural shapes derived from nature to
phase of the arm stroke. provide a more facile, dexterous, and efficient
Compared to the crawl, the other three swim- mode of swimming?
ming styles—backstroke, butterfly, and breast- Although probably no further adaptation
stroke—produce oncoming flows a swimmer from nature will have the same dramatic ef-
cannot so easily intercept and translate into fect on the sport as the development of the
smooth continuous propulsion. dolphin kick, we can learn much by studying
In the back crawl, the arms remain almost fish and birds, their natural shapes, and the
the same distance from each other during the changing shapes they adopt during various
complete stroke cycle and do not overlap as phases of propulsion. Much of their efficiency
much as in the crawl stroke. So, unless a back- can be attributed to their skill in making
stroke swimmer has a tall, lean body and an smooth transitions from the end of one pro-
arm reach long enough to control the oncoming pulsive impulse to the start of the next. Unfor-
flow efficiently at entry, accurate timing be- tunately, the subject of transitional phases of
tween the entry arm and the finishing arm is the stroke in human swimming has yet to
more difficult than in the crawl. studied.

--- Page 116 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 101
Ideal Postures and Shapes 2. The hand and forearm, from the tip of
the little finger to the point of the elbow,
The literature contains little mention of the
assume a lunate, or crescent-shaped,
possibility of ideal postures or shapes of the
configuration.
hand in relation to the wrist as the arm moves
through the changing phases of a swimming Both shapes are concerned with lift enhance-
stroke. ment in that they help keep the flow attached to
A better understanding of how to shape the the hands and forearms. Some butterfly swim-
hand-wrist posture during the arm stroke could mers who keep their thumbs pressed in and
improve swimming efficiency. This applies to their hands in a straight line with their fore-
the postures assumed by the hand and wrist in arms encounter flow separation very early in
relation to each other during the propulsive the stroke. The vortex patterns set up by the
impulse, at the end of the propulsive impulse, swimmer in figure 5.6 show that she has kept
and during the transitional phase between the the flow attached to her hands and forearms
end of one propulsive impulse and the start of even though her hands have already changed
another. direction from their initial outward sweep and
Birds and fish exhibit shapes adapted to are well into the inward phase of the stroke.
their function, and they are able to change their The only visible signs of pending flow separa-
body forms somewhat to alter the flow reac- tion are slight swellings in the vortex trails near
tions around their bodies. A study of the shapes the fingertips.
and changing forms adopted by fish and birds
The Alula Effect in Smoothing Out
may have beneficial applications for human
swimming. the Flow
Careful study of the arm posture of an ex-
In bird flight, the alula, sometimes referred to
pert butterfly swimmer during the inward
as the bastard wing, is an interesting refine-
sweep of the stroke (figure 5.6) indicates that
ment that acts as a subsidiary airfoil in front of
the swimmer, probably without knowing it,
the leading edge of the main wing. Under
has adopted two characteristic shapes com-
normal flight conditions, the alula is folded
mon in nature:
back out of the way. As the bird approaches
1. The projecting thumbs each act like an stalling speed, however, and the airflow over
alula, or small extra wing. the upper wing surface becomes turbulent, the
Figure 5.6 Arm posture of expert butterfly swimmer.

--- Page 117 Text ---
102 Breakthrough Swimming
alula is spread forward to form a slot through The Efficiency of Lunate,
which air rushes, restoring a smooth, fast air- or Crescent-Shaped, Contours
stream and curtailing stall (figure 5.7). In simi-
lar fashion, when a swimmer’s hand is inclined The wings of seagoing birds such as shearwa-
at too large an angle of attack to keep the flow ters and albatrosses, which spend an enormous
attached to the hand, the thumb, when held amount of time in the air, are swept backward.
away from the hand, produces a throttle effect Even the limbs of species adapted to propul-
through which the speed of the flow increases, sion through water (a fluid, just as air is, and
creating a low-pressure area on the knuckle thus subject to many of the same physical laws)
side of the hand that produces more lift and a show the same crescent shape, particularly the
smoother flow around the hand. tail fins of fish such as marlin and tuna and
marine mammals such as dolphins and whales
(van Dam 1988; figure 5.8).
a
Figure 5.8 The ulnar-flexion of the wrist in the
human swimmer resembles various lunate shapes
in nature.
b
Does the crescent shape bestow some special
advantage? Only recently, with the development
of computerized modeling techniques that faith-
fully represent the dynamics of vortex wakes,
was it discovered that the most aerodynamically
efficient shape is not the conventional flattened
c ellipse. A half-moon planform, like that of a
whale’s tail, with a curved leading edge and a
straight trailing edge is superior, and a crescent
planform, in which both edges curve backward
like a swift’s wing, is more effective still.
These shapes enhance performance because
the vortices that form at the trailing edge of the
inboard section of a curved wing or fin wash
downward (sideways for a fin) ahead of those
further along the limb, producing updrafts and
sidedrafts that like miniature hurricanes, agi-
d
tate nearby fluid particles.
Figure 5.7 Use of alula mechanism to create The tip of a wing or fin acts in turn like a sail,
steady flow. (a) Foil in steady flow. (b) Steep angle converting some of the kinetic energy of these
of attack produces unsteady flow. (c) Alula restores spiraling streams into forward thrust. In this
steady flow. (d) The thumb used as an alula. manner, a crescent planform generates at least 10

--- Page 118 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 103
percent less induced drag than an elliptical one, them in flow channels, it should be possible to
a reduction that grows in significance as the time analyze the exact effects these shaping tech-
an animal spends flying or swimming increases. niques have on the surrounding flow field. It
In the human swimmer, the ulnar-flexion of would also be possible to measure at what
the wrist in relation to the forearm creates a angles of attack flow separation (and conse-
crescent-shaped contour that keeps the flow quent vortex shedding) takes place.
attached around the hand and forearm. This is
important because if the flow were to separate
from forearm and hand, drag would increase.
In fact, some swimmers who changed to an
ulnar-flexion of the wrist during the inward
sweep of the arm reported increased ease in
this phase of the stroke without experiencing
loss of propulsion (figure 5.9).
Figure 5.10 Outward arm sweep of champion
butterfly swimmer Mary T. Meagher. The fingertips
appear to be the highest point of the entire arm.
Adapted from instructional film by Maglischo and
Gambril, produced by First Essex Productions.
Midstroke Transitions
Figure 5.9 Ulnar wrist flexion on inward sweep Even at topflight swim meets it’s common to
of the hand. see swimmers whose techniques are based too
much on tugging, pulling, and pushing, which
The discussion so far has centered on the are essentially land-type concepts. Many swim-
effect of ulnar wrist flexion during the inward mers try to pull directly through the hard part
sweep of a swimming stroke, but what are we to of the stroke instead of adopting transitional
make of the ulnar wrist flexion sometimes seen postures of the hand that would enable them to
during the outward sweep of a swimming more easily control the oncoming flow.
stroke? In addition to assuming the crescent- We might possibly learn something from
shaped contour of the lower arm, some swim- observing the transitional shapes adopted by
mers also incline the hand slightly upward certain reef fish when maneuvering. Their fins
during the outward sweep so that the fingertips move through a very flat angle as they fan
appear to be the highest part of the entire arm. around to a new posture in a helicoidal path.
The outward arm sweep of champion but- Fish do not waste energy by trying to overcome
terfly swimmer Mary T. Meagher is a good a developing or increasing resistance such as
example of this action (figure 5.10). The slight that encountered by a human swimmer as the
upward tilt of her hands is not unlike that of a elbow reaches maximum bend in midstroke
large soaring bird turning up its wingtip pri- and the hand reaches an angle almost perpen-
mary feathers to reduce drag induction. In dicular to the line of forward progression. The
other swimmers, the elbows are pronouncedly spiraling fin of the reef fish simply goes around
higher than the hands, which in turn are set at the obstacle of increased resistance.
a sharp angle from the wrists to shape the Perhaps the human swimmer could copy
whole arm remarkably like a cantilevered hy- this action, when swimming crawl, for example.
drofoil. By making models of the functional In midstroke the forearm is medially rotated so
arm shapes of talented swimmers and testing that the hand is turned slightly, as shown in

--- Page 119 Text ---
104 Breakthrough Swimming
figure 5.11. The transition is made with a quick, Functional Shaping
deft movement. The palm of the hand is turned
as a New Approach
to face slightly forward, almost like turning a
to Stroke Technique
vertical slat in a venetian blind. The motion
quickly presents the hand at a more acute angle
The purpose of this chapter has not been to
with less drag as the hand and forearm round
recommend dramatic new changes in tech-
out to finish the stroke with a fanlike action
nique but rather to show how efficient propul-
(figure 5.12). A biomechanical study of this
sion depends on adroit manipulation of the
suggested midstroke transitional maneuver,
reacting flow.
performed by a skilled swimmer, could prove
Underwater photography shows that tal-
interesting and enlightening.
ented swimmers use a variety of hand, finger,
and thumb configurations during the chang-
ing phases of a swimming stroke (figure 5.13).
It is highly unlikely that any one swimmer
could incorporate all these principles within
an individual stroke pattern, nor is it recom-
mended that a swimmer attempt to do so. How
should a coach approach teaching the various
shaping techniques such as the alula effect, the
a c
ulnar wrist flexion, hand cupping, and so on?
Each person should experiment to find which
of these techniques can be comfortably used
within his or her personal swimming style. For
example, whereas one swimmer may feel an
advantage is gained by assuming a lunate
shape between hand and forearm, another
swimmer may feel more comfortable keeping
the hand aligned with the forearm. The coach’s
b d role will not be to enforce these finer embellish-
ments on a swimmer but to recognize their
Figure 5.11 Midstroke transition showing four
value and not intervene when a swimmer uses
views of medially rotated hands in the crawl
them naturally.
stroke: (a) top right view, (b) bottom right view,
Traditional coaching methods have focused
(c) top left view, and (d) bottom left view.
on establishing desired stroke patterns but have
neglected to provide the swimmer with ad-
equate feedback on the efficiency of perfor-
mance. Children should be taught flow recog-
nition and manipulation from an early age.
They should be made aware of functional shap-
ing of the hand and arm as important aspects of
technique. Learning to create, feel, and recog-
nize the ideal reacting flow of the water gives
swimmers instant feedback on the efficiency of
their swimming strokes.
Figure 5.12 Fanning to avoid drag in midstroke
transition, side view.

--- Page 120 Text ---
Propulsive Mechanisms of Speed Swimming 105
Figure 5.13 Various hand-digit postures used by talented swimmers.

--- Page 122 Text ---
Chapter 6
Coaching the Feel
of the Water
The feel of the water refers to a
swimmer’s intuitive ability to feel
and effectively handle the water. It
is generally believed that feel of the
water is an elusive quality unique to
the talented athlete; swimmers of
only average ability cannot hope to
emulate the acute sensory percep-
tion of the talented motor genius.
Nevertheless, I intend to show that
by heightening the sense of touch
and learning how to interpret sensa-
tions of moving pressure, swimmers
of average ability can acquire the
subtleties of advanced stroke tech-
nique. Talented swimmers coached
in this method will likewise achieve
greater expertise.
A more apt title to this chapter
may well be “Coaching the Feel of
the Flow.” Water flows when a force
acts on it; a swimmer’s hand always
propels against the pressure of mov-
ing water. The force exerted by a
skilled swimming stroke causes the
water to flow in a distinct pattern
(Colwin 1984a). The method in this
chapter shows swimmers how to feel
for the ideal flow reaction to their
stroke mechanics and thus receive
instant feedback on their efficiency.
This new approach teaches swim-
mers to anticipate, control, and ma-
nipulate the flow of the water. They
learn that the arm functions not only
as a propelling instrument but also
as a skilled and sensitive shaper of
the flow.
107

--- Page 123 Text ---
108 Breakthrough Swimming
Ideal Flow Reactions during the split-second action of a swimming
stroke. This differs from previous methods that
The first step is to explain how the flow behaves describe only the mechanics of the stroke. In
during each phase of an efficient swimming addition, the new terminology relates to ob-
stroke. The flow directions that can be antici- taining feedback by feeling the flow on the
pated in the different swimming strokes can be hand and forearm. These verbal cues are im-
described simply. The oncoming flow—which portant to the effectiveness of the method and
in the crawl-stroke hand entry moves from the are valuable as rehearsal techniques to enhance
fingertips to the wrist and along the arm—is subsequent performance. Later in this chapter,
known as distal in its direction. A flow that I will discuss appropriate descriptions of what
moves toward the radial bone (or from thumb pressure sensations a swimmer should feel.
to little finger) is termed radial, for example, the
Flow-Shaping Skills
flow produced when the elbows bend to bring
the hands under the body in the crawl, butterfly,
The swimmers are taught flow-shaping skills
and breaststroke. An ulnar flow moves toward
by which they create and detect specific flows
the ulnar bone or from little finger to thumb, for
in the water. These flow shapers, as they are
example, the flow produced as the arms extend
called, have a beneficial two-way effect, in that
and the stroke rounds out to the hips in the
a swimmer’s efforts to shape the flow cause a
crawl and butterfly. A flow is proximal when it
reciprocal shaping effect on the limb itself. The
moves from the wrist toward the fingertips, as
feedback received from the flow reaction causes
happens in the backstroke as the arm straight-
the proprioceptors in the muscles to respond
ens at the end of the stroke (Schleihauf 1979).
by adjusting the posture and attitude of the
propelling arm. Flow shapers produce positive
The Importance of Hand-Forearm
and even exciting results because they instantly
Rotation
groove the hand and arm in accurate stroke
patterns. Even the skeptics become convinced
Swimmers are shown how flow behavior is
that this is a unique and effective way to teach
related to an important aspect of stroke mechan-
efficient stroke mechanics. The essence of the
ics: emphasizing hand-forearm rotation within
method is: the feel of the flow shows a swim-
comfortable limits for each individual swim-
mer exactly where to place each moving se-
mer. This is the mechanism that sets up the ideal
quence of the swimming stroke.
flow around the hand and forearm in all the
strokes. The practical application of this mecha-
Sensitizing Procedures
nism for swimmers of all strokes is simple: Start
the stroke with the palm(s) facing outward and Special sensitizing procedures are introduced
gradually rotate your hand-forearm unit to sensitize the sensory nerve endings to the
throughout the stroke, with particular emphasis moving pressure of the water (or, more pre-
on achieving the maximum amount of elbow cisely, transient pressure induced by motion).
bend in midstroke that is comfortable. Find the The propelling surfaces of the hands and fore-
amount of hand-forearm rotation and elbow arms are also sensitized to simulate specific
bend that develops the strongest pressure on the flow reactions. The method is simple. Sensitiv-
moving flow but still feels comfortable. ity to the flow increases at once. Swimmers of
average ability learn to regulate a smooth and
New Terminology Related to efficient stroke.
Feedback on Flow Reactions Although these techniques quickly stimu-
late the sensory nerve endings, this is of little
Introduce a new terminology. Short descrip- value unless the swimmer makes an associa-
tive phrases such as “trap, wrap, unwrap” tell tion between the feel of the moving water and
a swimmer how to handle the flow correctly the particular phase of the swimming stroke.

--- Page 124 Text ---
Coaching the Feel of the Water 109
Only then can meaning be given to the sense of 4. Demonstrate sensitizing procedures and
touch and an intelligent concept formed of the explain how they can be used to simu-
desired stroke mechanics. late specific flow reactions.
5. Emphasize the importance of regular
Connecting Sensory Information
practice. Ensure constant repetition by
With Stroke Effectiveness swimmers of all the procedures out-
lined in the preceding tasks.
The method short circuits the motor-learning
process and renders the complex more simple.
Using Appropriate Descriptions
The deliberate intention is to cause an immedi-
ate connection between sensory information What sensations of touch should a swimmer
and stroke effectiveness. By giving instant experience when manipulating water effi-
meaning to the sense of touch, the procedure ciently? How should they be described? Little
adds a new perspective to traditional methods, thought has been given to this aspect of coach-
so it is used even in the early stages of learning. ing, which is not surprising when even ac-
Young swimmers rapidly improve their ability knowledged stroke technicians have used such
to seek out and recognize ideal flow reactions. descriptions of water as “fickle substance.” We
It is unnecessary to burden a swimmer with have all been guilty of inadequately describing
academic considerations—valid though they how the water should feel to a correctly strok-
may be—such as lift, drag, ideal angles of at- ing swimmer.
tack, and which movement planes to empha- For years, one of my favorite descriptions
size. Talented swimmers, when exposed to the was “Enter your hand and feel the pressure of
method, develop unusual dexterity in direct- the water on your palm. Try to make the pres-
ing and channeling the flow efficiently. Even sure progressively harder as you drive
accomplished swimmers improve their tech- through.” Although this may have been as
niques when made aware of the exact flow good a description as possible at the time, it
reactions they can anticipate; in fact, they be- does not describe the desired feel accurately
come enthusiastic and keen to learn more about enough in the context of existing knowledge.
the process. A once popular and comparatively apt de-
scription of the feel of the water likened it to the
The Goal of the Method feeling of pulling through soft mud. More re-
cently, however, a “fixed point of resistance”
The goal of this method is to coach the feel of description has become popular. (This prob-
the water by showing swimmers how to use ably resulted from biomechanical studies based
their sense of touch to interpret and improve on the convenient assumption of essentially
stroke effectiveness. The method encompasses still water.) To convey the concept of a force
the following tasks: acting on a mass of water, the act of propulsion
has been variously described as feeling for
1. Describe and explain the flow reactions
undisturbed water, anchoring the hand on a
that can be anticipated during each phase
fixed spot in the water and pulling the body
of a skilled swimming stroke.
past it, pulling along an imaginary knotted
2. Demonstrate and explain hand-forearm rope, and other similar descriptions.
rotation and elbow bending and how These descriptions, strictly speaking, are in-
these mechanisms set up the ideal flow appropriate because the propulsive force is not
around the hand and forearm in all the applied against a solid or rigid resistance.
swimming strokes. Coaches should use carefully chosen words
3. Demonstrate flow-shaper skills and ex- when instructing a swimmer. Many of our well-
plain how they shape ideal stroke pat- worn coaching terms may not produce the
terns for the individual swimmer. reactions we desire.

--- Page 125 Text ---
110 Breakthrough Swimming
Understanding the Concept When the edges of the hand are used to split
of Relative Flow or separate the flow, the hand is used as a foil,
causing a fine, thin, shearing separation at the
A good example of a potentially misleading trailing edge rather than the broad, blunt, ex-
term is the word “catch,” which has been used cessively turbulent separation that results from
since the early days of swimming to describe the straight backward paddle action.
how a swimming stroke should begin. The old To avoid pulling straight backward, the hand
idea of feeling for the catch point is incorrect, is moved in a slightly curved path across the
however. Fluid dynamic principles contradict line of forward progress (Counsilman 1971).
the popular notion that the hand attaches to a Another way of describing this action is to say
fixed point in the water and levers the body that the hand is moved in the lateral, or trans-
past it. Instead, one should feel the oncoming, verse, plane. (Of course, the path of the hand
or relative, flow advance over the palm of the actually moves in three planes simultaneously,
hand and along the forearm. The hand always namely, the lateral, vertical, and horizontal.) By
encounters an oncoming flow of water. moving the hand along a curved path a swim-
The instant the fingertips enter the water mer will be able to tilt its leading edge slightly
there is a reacting flow that continues through- upward, thus creating a foil-like effect that will
out the stroke. Like all fluids, water responds increase the pressure resistance on the palm of
immediately to any movement through it; like the hand. In this manner, a swimmer can feel
all fluids, water changes shape under the ac- the pressure of the flow on the palm of the hand
tion of forces. These changes are known as without pulling directly backward.
deformation and appear as elasticity and flow.
Pressure Sensations Caused by
When a swimmer propels efficiently, the flow
and the elasticity of the water will be felt as a Different Propulsive Mechanisms
stretching effect.
The obvious question at this point is what the
differences are in the feel of the water between
Correct Manipulation
using the hand as a foil and using it as a paddle.
of the Hand When the hand is used as a foil, pressure resis-
tance is felt on the palm of the hand and the
Swimming skill is dramatically increased by flow is felt on the backs of the hands and
learning the simple act of splitting the flow fingers, particularly on the skin over the knuck-
with the fingers and hand throughout the stroke. les. The water is also flowing over the palm of
Flow separation causes different patterns of the hand, but its presence is felt as pressure
pressure to form around the hand. There is resistance, not flow, because the water flows
always flow from an area of high pressure to more slowly over the palm of the hand than
one of lower pressure in a correctly performed over the knuckle side, thus creating an area of
stroke. This causes a bound circulation of water higher pressure. The swimmer feels this pres-
around the hand that generates the propulsive sure instead of the flow.
force. All one needs to do is to continue split- When the hand is used as a paddle, the
ting the flow to maintain this propulsive force. pressure resistance is also felt on the palm of the
The contour of the hand and the angle at hand, but there is no sensation at all on the
which it is held while splitting the flow will knuckle side because the flow separates around
affect the amount of propulsive pressure pro- both edges of the hand, not one edge only (the
duced. This is based on sound principles of trailing edge) as in the foil-type method. Pull-
fluid dynamics. It is more efficient to split the ing the hand like a paddle causes excessive
flow with the edges (either the fingertips or drag turbulence on the hand and results in
sides) of the hand than to use the hand like a wasted energy when compared with the more
paddle and pull with the palm of the hand flat efficient foil-type method. Obviously, the pre-
against the pressure resistance of the water. viously cited descriptions are inadequate to

--- Page 126 Text ---
Coaching the Feel of the Water 111
convey the tactile sensations (“feel”) of modern entry of a talented swimmer often seems al-
stroke mechanics. most leisurely. The swimmer feels for the mov-
ing pressure of the oncoming flow and gradu-
Describing Flow Manipulation ally starts to apply force against it. The hand of
the talented swimmer possesses a complex sen-
Assuming a swimmer has been taught the
sitivity (or, more accurately, a sensibility) that
function of hand-forearm rotation and elbow
almost seems to give it sight.
bending in manipulating the flow, the swim-
The talented swimmer appears to possess an
ming stroke should be taught as a working
innate awareness of not only the exact speed at
sequence of “trap, wrap, and unwrap the
which to enter the hand but also how to time
flow.” This helps relate each important phase
the start of the stroke effectively. The hand
of the stroke with the relative flow reaction. In
neither slows to a stop out in front of the
the crawl stroke this sequence works as fol-
swimmer nor starts the stroke too soon, before
lows:
the oncoming flow has been accepted and
1. The trap occurs as the arm enters the trapped under the arm.
The hand’s first contact with the water at
water with elbow up and hand pitched diago-
entry is critically important. Coaches often cor-
nally outward. The swimmer feels an oncom-
rect the middle part of a stroke before checking
ing flow of water advance along the entire
to see if the entry has been made efficiently. If
undersurface of the arm from the palm of the
the oncoming flow has not been engaged ini-
hand to the armpit. At this point the flow is
tially, there is no sense in correcting a subse-
considered to be trapped under the arm.
quent phase of the stroke.
2. The wrap occurs as the flow is wrapped
around the hand and forearm as they rotate
Anticipating the Oncoming Flow
inward after a short downward press. The wrap
is completed when the elbow reaches maxi- Most faulty handling of the flow originates
mum bend (approximately 90 degrees) and the from incorrect technique at entry. The entry
hand has moved across under the body. hand’s forward motion into the water pro-
3. The unwrap occurs as the elbow extends duces an oncoming flow. If this flow is broken
and the arm straightens. At the end of the up or disturbed at entry, the swimmer will have
stroke the flow is finally unwrapped from the difficulty manipulating the water during the
forearm and hand as the stroke rounds out past later phases of the stroke. A swimmer should
the hip joint. know in advance the nature of the pressure
sensation that will be experienced when the
The entire sequence of trap, wrap, and un-
hand enters. In this way a swimmer can antici-
wrap occurs within a fraction of a second. The
pate the oncoming flow and handle it effec-
swimmer is taught to think of the sequence as
tively. The aim is to insert the hand smoothly
a very quick passage of events. Each successive
into the oncoming flow and immediately feel
phase happens with increasing speed to pro-
the flow move along the palm and under the
duce the desired stroke acceleration (Counsil-
forearm and upper arm.
man and Wasilak 1982). The precise applica-
As mentioned earlier, the arm enters the
tion of the trap, wrap, unwrap concept of flow
water with elbow up and hand pitched diago-
manipulation varies with each swimming
nally outward. It is easy to imagine the hand
stroke.
and arm in this position as being shaped simi-
larly to the side of a ship, which gradually
Manipulating the Flow
slopes backward from the bow and bulges at
at the Hand Entry the waist. By imagining this portion of a ship
moving forward under the water, cutting the
The way a swimmer controls the hand at entry water sharply at the bow and channeling it
is usually a first indication of talent. The hand backward around and slightly under the hull, a

--- Page 127 Text ---
112 Breakthrough Swimming
swimmer will form a good concept of the func- Detecting the Stretching Effect
tion of the hand at entry: The hand, pitched in the Oncoming Flow
diagonally outward as it enters, performs much
the same function as the bow of a ship. Great emphasis and attention should be given
As stated before, the entry is the preliminary to adequate coaching of the entry phase of the
phase of the stroke—the trap phase—during stroke. Engaging the water correctly at entry is
which the flow is allowed to advance along the crucial to an effective stroke. The ship drill,
undersurface of the arm as the swimmer ma- which will be explained presently, is designed
neuvers it into position for the wrap phase. specifically to simulate the posture of the hand
and arm at entry and to teach a swimmer to feel
Entry Errors the moving pressure sensation of the oncoming
flow.
Unfortunately, a swimmer can easily commit
The ship drill is perhaps the most valuable
several errors at the hand entry that diminish
drill I’ve ever used in coaching. It is extremely
the efficiency of the stroke and cause the swim-
effective in helping a swimmer form a concept
mer to muscle through the water in a futile
of the entry phase of the stroke. As proficiency
attempt to gain purchase on it. Probably the
in discerning the sensation of moving pressure
most harmful error is to crash the hand into the
increases, it becomes possible for a swimmer to
entry, attempting to start the stroke before sub-
detect the stretching effect in the oncoming
tly accepting the oncoming flow.
flow. A swimmer learns to relate the amount of
The effect of this error can be understood by
stretch in the flow with swimming speed and
imagining a fast naval destroyer equipped
correct timing of the arms.
with a guillotine-like device fixed to the bow
at a right angle to the oncoming flow. At
The Role of Touch
intervals, this guillotine suddenly drops into
the water and disturbs the flow. The effect is to in Motor Learning
continually interrupt the vessel’s forward mo-
mentum. Skilled swimmers create a fast output of high-
A similar effect, surprisingly enough, can quality movements. Yet even when swimming
frequently be seen in competitive swimmers— at high speed, they frequently give the impres-
even talented world-class ones—particularly sion of being unhurried. The expert seems to
distance swimmers using an inertial type of have all the time in the world when compared
stroke. As the stroke starts with what used to be with the novice, whose forward progress is
called a dig-pull or chop-catch, the bow wave more like a series of emergencies.
drops, or splutters, indicating sudden interfer- In skilled performance no surprises occur.
ence with the body’s momentum. The swimmer is always ready for each chang-
The rationale behind the inertial type of hand ing sequence of the stroke. Exact timing is an
entry may be based on a technique used in obvious element of skill, which largely involves
athletics and rowing. At the start of a stride, a the predictable repetition of many successive
runner’s foot is already moving backward to movements in accurate and precise patterns.
maintain the runner’s momentum and prevent How are the components of each sequence
jarring the foot on the ground. Similarly, a coordinated and organized? We tend to think
rower’s blade travels backward before it enters of skill mainly in terms of movement. In de-
the water. scribing a swimming stroke, we focus on what
If the dig-pull is based on this principle, it is done. The analysis usually breaks the action
cannot be applied successfully to swimming. down into detailed units of movement. This
The body is not favorably positioned in the represents the swimmer’s output, but we tend
water to perform such a technique; moreover, a to ignore the input, partly because it is taken for
swimmer cannot generate sufficient speed to granted and partly because it is difficult or
achieve this effect. impossible to observe directly.

--- Page 128 Text ---
Coaching the Feel of the Water 113
I have often witnessed over an hour of stroke aircraft to control various mechanisms. All these
instruction without hearing any reference to mechanisms have devices (sensors, we may
the water or what a swimmer should feel. call them) that measure some physical variable
Many otherwise excellent technical articles and use this feedback information to control
make little or no reference to the water. Most the mechanisms that assist the pilot.
descriptions of swimming technique neglect to Modern aircraft controls are linked by
mention the role played by the water, the very servomechanisms to either electric or hydrau-
medium in which the activity takes place. lic actuators that automatically maintain the
Many highly skilled swimmers cannot ex- aircraft at the chosen altitude and speed.
plain why they perform as they do. They may Servomechanisms sense an error (e.g., depar-
be unaware of the particular sensory input that ture from the intended course) and apply a
controls their activity, which may be why a correction to the relevant control. Signals from
skilled swimmer is not always a particularly the sensor, called the misalignment detector,
good teacher. Usually, a skill is taught by dem- activate a small servomotor (from the Latin
onstrating how the desired movement should servus, meaning slave), which turns the control
look rather than by explaining how it should surface in the direction necessary to correct the
feel. misalignment. Thus, the procedures are per-
The more purposeful or skilled the move- formed without the pilot’s intervention.
ment, the more it depends on sensory impulses, The point is that these devices function auto-
which in swimming are primarily those associ- matically to help the pilot. Similarly, in coach-
ated with vision and touch. In learning the ing the feel of the water, the aim is to allow a
more precise movements of swimming, visual swimmer to rely on only a minimum number of
information is essential while the degree of consciously perceived cues and let automatic
muscle tension and amount of muscle contrac- feedback systems control other functions of the
tion are being delicately adjusted to the task, a stroke without too much conscious effort.
point we easily appreciate if we try to learn any
precise movement with eyes shut. The Use of Simultaneous
Voluntary movements are modified by sen-
Visual and Tactile
sory stimuli received from the skin, muscles,
and joints. Sensory impulses act at all times to Impressions
guide muscular contractions. The muscles are
under the direct and perfect control of the The traditional emphasis when teaching a stroke
motor neurons; these neurons never stimulate pattern to a novice has been on the visual. I, too,
the muscles to action except when influenced long believed that the sense of touch was usu-
to do so by other neurons. ally too imprecise to be the source of form and
Water pressure on the sensory nerve end- shape in the early stages of learning. Further-
ings, the sense of balance, and the relationship more, though some people learn more by means
of the limbs help to produce a smoothly coordi- of tactile feedback whereas others receive more
nated stroke. Attention may be divided be- beneficial information visually, it is difficult to
tween different kinds of sensory messages. know whether this difference in perceptual
Confronted with a mass of available informa- capacity among individuals is significant.
tion, a swimmer learns to notice only some of it Over a period of about six years, I experi-
and ignore much that is irrelevant to the imme- mented with developing a method of coaching
diate task. Via the process of facilitation at the stroke technique that would involve using si-
synapses, repetition causes special pathways multaneous visual and tactile impressions. I
to be slowly laid down so that the skilled move- had long before become uncomfortable with
ments become more accurate. merely explaining the shape, form, and pattern
Muscular movements are driven by a servo- of a desired movement without being able to
mechanism similar in many respects to the relate its effect on the water. The aim of my
automated feedback systems used in modern method is to teach a swimmer to relate each

--- Page 129 Text ---
114 Breakthrough Swimming
phase of a swimming stroke with the feel of the ample, they help the swimmer position the arm
flow and thus obtain instant feedback on stroke correctly at entry, correct a dropped elbow, or,
efficiency. for a butterfly swimmer, know whether to pull
This method allows a certain amount of indi- wider or narrower. Most important, the flow
viduality. At first, the learner is shown a few shaper helps a swimmer find the stroke pattern
sample flow-shaper skills and left alone to play that accords naturally with the characteristics
around with them in the water. of individual physique. Some examples of flow
After a week or so, some instruction is be- shapers follow.
gun, usually individual. Not everyone is given
the same instruction because each learner is The Ship Drill
directed to a particular phase of the stroke that
This important exercise teaches swimmers how
appears to need attention. This is generally
to insert their hands into the oncoming flow
how the method is applied—not so much on
prior to starting the swimming stroke. The
items of technique but on particular movement
swimmer pushes off from the wall with body
phases of the stroke.
outstretched and hands back to back and touch-
Using visual and tactile impressions simul-
ing, forming a shape akin to the prow of a ship.
taneously from the start in a definite teaching
The swimmer will feel the oncoming flow pro-
format causes noted changes in the sensitivity
duced by the pushoff as it advances along the
of the learner to particular features of the swim-
palms of the hands and under the forearms and
ming stroke and its effect on the water.
upper arms to the armpits. The pressure sensa-
Tactile perception can be developed to where
tion of the oncoming flow can be prolonged by
a swimmer can receive continuous feedback on
continuing momentum with the dolphin kick
propulsive effectiveness. This information helps
or by using fins (figure 6.1).
the swimmer to keep adjusting and refining the
stroke at the delivery end to maintain effi-
ciency. For example, the link between seeing
the hand entering the water and bringing the
hand into contact with it is somehow obvious.
The hand just seems to move in the right way.
If the swimmer’s hand is alive and sensitive to
the feel of the water, it acts as a sensing device
that transforms the incoming signal into ap-
propriate action. Equally important is that the a
swimmer has been taught not only to antici-
pate the oncoming relative flow but also to
handle it in the most effective way.
The following sections contain descriptions
of the flow-shaping skills and sensitizing tech-
niques used in this conceptualizing process.
Flow Shapers
A flow shaper is an exercise that teaches swim-
mers to create and detect specific flows in the
water. It operates in much the same way as the
aircraft servomechanisms already described.
Flow shapers are remarkably effective in
b
helping a swimmer automatically find the most
effective path, posture, and attitude of the hand Figure 6.1 The ship drill: (a) ship drill posture
and arm during a swimming stroke; for ex- and (b) action of the ship’s prow.

--- Page 130 Text ---
Coaching the Feel of the Water 115
The ship drill should be performed daily. It is Half-Ship Drill
more valuable than any other procedure in
Use this drill to enhance feel of the flow at hand
teaching a swimmer to feel and recognize the
entry, especially for swimmers who experience
oncoming flow.
difficulty in feeling the flow. The swimmer
Beginning in the ship-drill position, the
kicks while wearing fins and holding one arm
freestyle stroke should be started with elbow
out front simulating the entry posture. The
up, palm turned outward and pressing down-
hand should be pitched diagonally outward
ward in a curved, diagonal motion. The palm
and the elbow up; the other arm is held at the
gradually rotates inward as the hand moves
side. The swimmer should feel for the oncom-
inward in the lateral plane toward the center
ing flow.
line of the body. During this motion the hand
and forearm rotate as a unit. This motion
Tunnel Flow, or A-OK
changes the direction of the oncoming flow as
it is wrapped around the hand and forearm in
Press the thumb against the forefinger to
a strong swirl.
form a tunnel through which the flow is
The swimmer should concentrate on bend-
channeled as the hand changes direction in
ing the elbow to approximately 90 degrees or as
the stroke (figure 6.3). This exercise effec-
much as feels comfortable. As the elbow bend
tively teaches flow recognition and how to
increases, some swimmers may turn the palm
angle the hands efficiently; in fact, it often
of the hand slightly upward toward the chest to
will groove a stroke pattern automatically. If
obtain maximum forearm rotation, but such
a butterfly swimmer’s pull is too wide or
extreme rotation may feel comfortable only to
narrow, for example, this exercise will direct
tall, lean swimmers.
the swimmer accordingly.
Destroyer–Ocean Liner–Barge Drill
Practice ship drills with hands in the three dif-
ferent positions shown in figure 6.2. These drills
show swimmers how the changing postures of
the hands and arms cause a transition from
streamlined flow to turbulent (resistive) flow. In
figure 6.2a there is a free movement of the on-
coming flow felt on the palms of the out-turned
hands and along the forearms. In figures 6.2b
Figure 6.3 Tunnel flow, or A-OK.
and 6.2c, the flow gradually becomes more re-
sistive as the hand and forearm posture changes.
This exercise also indicates if a crawl swim-
mer is allowing the elbow to drop during the
pull because, if so, the flow will not pass through
the tunnel. In fact, this drill should be used in
all strokes. Swimmers may try forming the
tunnel with one hand while keeping the other
hand closed. When both hands are opened and
used in the normal fashion, however, the hand
b
that was closed will be found also to have
improved its feel.
a c
Figure 6.2 Ship drill variations: (a) destroyer;
(b) ocean liner; (c) barge.

--- Page 131 Text ---
116 Breakthrough Swimming
Piano Playing Using this distinction, I experimented with
sensitizing techniques for swimming that al-
In this exercise the swimmer pretends to play
ternate the application of transient and static
the piano by using individual finger move-
pressures. I found that such techniques as ap-
ments while swimming. This helps the swim-
plying different pressures (including static and
mer feel how separate finger movements influ-
transient pressures), rubbing the hands and
ence flow channeling (figure 6.4).
forearms in the desired flow directions, using a
loofah as a sensitizing device, and several other
procedures quickly stimulated the sensory
nerve endings.
Interestingly, sensitivity to the water ap-
pears to decrease as a workout progresses,
even for talented swimmers. There also ap-
pear to be day-to-day variations. I can only
guess at the reason for this—perhaps fatigue
or overstimulation of the sensory nerve end-
ings.
Although swimmers have little or no diffi-
culty in learning to recognize the oncoming
(distal) flow at hand entry, some encounter
difficulty in recognizing the subsequent flows
Figure 6.4 Piano playing.
(radial, ulnar, and proximal) set up by the hand
and forearm as they move through the swim-
Sensitizing the Sensory
ming stroke. This can be overcome by teaching
Nerve Endings swimmers to rub the hand and forearm in the
direction of the appropriate flow.
In developing this method I soon realized that I borrowed from the biomechanists another
there’s no difficulty in increasing the sensibility very effective procedure. Instead of videotap-
of the nerve endings. There are many methods ing swimmers underwater after they have
to achieve this, including the rehabilitative tech- learned their stroke mechanics, I videotape
niques used after hand surgery, the touch them while they are learning. Instead of the old
method for learning to type, and the methods method of practicing on land in front of a
used to learn to read Braille. The heightened mirror, they practice—still on land—in front of
tactile sensibility must be related to the various video monitors while they are being video-
sequences of the swimming stroke, however. taped simultaneously from front and side. Three
The swimmer should be able to recognize and large electric fans (kept well away from the
interpret the feel of moving pressure against water for safety) are placed around the swim-
the hand and forearm during every phase of mer to simulate the reacting flows of the water
the swimming stroke. that occur during the various stages of the
A vast literature exists on the complex neuro- swimming stroke. Should a swimmer have dif-
logical functions of the human hand, which, as ficulty in sensing the flow, the palm of the hand
we know, is a truly remarkable instrument. Be- and forearm are wiped with a damp cloth to
cause of the complexity of the subject, I decided heighten the sense of touch.
to concentrate on a few aspects that I thought A swimmer can thus simultaneously see
most germane to my purpose. I found the ex- front and side views of the stroke on the moni-
periments of A. Lee Dellon (Dellon, Curtis, and tors and feel a simulation of the reacting flow.
Edgerton 1974) particularly valuable. As late as In addition, the swimmer can receive instruc-
1972, Dellon showed that the sense of touch tion while this is happening. The three stages
could be divided into two main areas: moving of visualize, verbalize, and feel (Counsilman
(transient) touch and constant (or static) touch. 1968) can occur almost simultaneously.

--- Page 132 Text ---
Coaching the Feel of the Water 117
Sensitizing procedures dramatically enhance to show how hand-forearm rotation develops
a swimmer’s feel of the water and should be an flow circulation. My personal belief, however,
everyday feature of the workout. Great empha- is that the greatest value of fist swimming is as
sis should be placed on sensitizing the hands to a sensitizing procedure for stimulating the sen-
the feel of the water, and the hands should sory nerve endings of the palms of the hands.
remain sensitized throughout the workout. An effective exercise for sensitizing the hands
When questioned, even talented swimmers and feet is to swim a set distance by alternating
admit that their feel of the water tends to di- fist swimming and overkicking (kicking with
minish as they progress through a workout, more force than necessary) on successive laps of
however. Whenever sensitivity to the water the pool. This can also be a demanding workout.
seems to lessen, a swimmer should resensitize Another variation is to swim with one hand
the hands so that the sense of touch becomes clenched while keeping the other hand open.
more acute as the workout continues. This contrasts the static pressure on the closed
hand with the transient pressure on the open
Fist Clenching
hand, increasing the swimmer’s awareness of
the water’s flow reactions.
The nerve endings on the palms quickly be-
come highly sensitized when subjected to con- The breaststroke and butterfly should fre-
trasts between static and transient pressures. quently be swum with fists clenched. While
Thus, if a swimmer clenches the fists tightly for pulling in the breaststroke, the swimmer should
two or three minutes before starting a swim, use a slight dolphin kick for counterbalance.
the sensory nerve endings overcompensate in Emphasis should be on hand-forearm rotation
reaction to the static pressure. When the hands and elbow bending because this action devel-
are opened again, they are particularly sensi- ops the flow circulation necessary for propul-
tive to the pressure of the moving flow. sion. This drill highlights the surprising amount
Swimmers should sensitize the hands at the of propulsion this mechanism can develop even
beginning of every workout by swimming the when the hands are not open to provide as
first 200 meters with their fists tightly clenched. much propulsion as possible. Although the
Because they will feel that they are slipping the forearms do not provide a great amount of
water, they should pull a little more slowly propulsion, their rotation is necessary and sig-
while doing this exercise, concentrating on nificant in setting up the desired flow circula-
keeping tightly clenched fists. The swimmer tion. When the hand is open, the hand and
should start the stroke with wrist turned out- forearm work as a unit. The hand is capable of
ward, thumb down, and emphasize hand-fore- developing more efficient circulation than the
arm rotation throughout the stroke while bend- forearm because it has a more favorable shape
ing the elbow to approximately 90 degrees in and can be manipulated on the wrist with more
midstroke. dexterity and through a larger range of move-
Fist swimming was named by the great stroke ment. When the hand and forearm are used as
technician Howard Firby. Firby recommended a unit, they form a most effective mechanism
fist swimming to develop “the feel of pulling for setting up flow circulation.
not only with the hands but with the forearms
as well” and to correct dropped elbows and Fingertip Pressing
induce the “over the barrel” feeling of the pull
(Firby 1975, page 15). These exercises sensitize the fingertips to the
My rediscovery of fist swimming resulted oncoming flow as the hands enter the water.
from reading Dellon’s reports and from my
1. Press each fingertip in turn against the
desire to develop as a sensitizing procedure a
thumb (figure 6.5).
method of applying contrasting static and tran-
sient pressures on the sensory nerve endings of 2. Now use both hands. Press the finger-
the hand. Clenching and then opening the hand tips of one hand against those of the
was a natural choice. I also use fist swimming other. Press hard and repeat frequently.

--- Page 133 Text ---
118 Breakthrough Swimming
3. Now press each fingertip of one hand Simultaneous Sensitization to
separately against its counterpart on the
Static and Transient Pressure
other hand. This develops dexterity.
4. Press the fingertips hard against the pool The hand can be held in a variety of postures
deck while waiting for the start of next during swimming to sensitize fingers, indi-
training set. vidually or in groups, to the sensation of mov-
ing pressure. Keeping the palm closed sensi-
tizes it via static pressure. These exercises greatly
sensitize the hands to the feeling of moving
pressure once normal swimming is resumed
(figure 6.6).
Figure 6.6 Simultaneous sensitization to static
Figure 6.5 Fingertip pressing. and transient pressure.

--- Page 134 Text ---
Coaching the Feel of the Water 119
Hand-Rubbing Exercises Daily Application of the Method
Swimmers find hand-rubbing exercises very In applying the method to daily practice, focus
effective in sensitizing the hands to recognize on three areas: flow manipulation, stroke tim-
precise flow reactions. Rubbing one hand ing, and flow-shaper drills and sensitization.
against the other can simulate a desired flow For flow manipulation, swimmers should be
direction, which helps make each phase of the taught always to feel they are inserting the
stroke consistently efficient. hands into the oncoming flow instead of at-
tacking the water and trying to push it directly
1. Rub one hand against the other from
backward. After feeling the oncoming flow,
the fingertips along the palm to the
swimmers should be told to wrap, or swirl, the
wrist and forearm. This teaches the
flow around the arm by gradually rotating the
feel of the oncoming flow as the hand
hand and forearm. The elbow at maximum
enters the water and is inserted into
bend should reach approximately 90 degrees
the oncoming flow at the start of the
and be comfortable to the swimmer; if it is not
stroke.
comfortable, adjust the amount of elbow bend
2. Rub one hand across the other hand in to suit the swimmer.
the desired direction to simulate trans- After some practice, swimmers will improve
verse (lateral) flows as they occur in in stroke efficiency and be able to recognize
either an inward or outward pitch of the weak spots in the stroke through tactile feed-
hands. back from the flow reaction. They can eliminate
3. Rub one hand along the other down the weak spots by experimenting with the amount
palm to the fingertips to simulate the of hand-forearm rotation and the degree of
finish of the stroke. elbow bend they perform.
The timing of the stroke depends greatly on
The Use of a Loofah the desired speed. Swimmers should be told
as a Sensitizing Device that the entry hand, palm turned outward, acts
as a sensor, or radar, as it accepts the oncoming
A highly effective method of sensitizing the relative flow and helps them know exactly
entire body to the flow of the water is to scrub when to start applying force at the beginning of
the skin lightly with a dry loofah immediately the stroke. The amount of oncoming flow to
before every practice or competition. (A loo- accept before starting the stroke depends on
fah, or luffa, resembles an elongated sponge the pace and stroke length each swimmer wishes
and is coarse and fibrous. It is the fruit of a to establish.
herbaceous plant, luffa cylindrica.) The swim- Feeling the differences in pressure on the
mer should scrub the entire body and, in par- entry hand at various speeds helps the swim-
ticular, perform a routine in which one arm is mers learn pacing. Feeling the oncoming flow
held overhead while the loofah is rubbed from is an important element in learning split-sec-
the fingertips down the palm of the hand, ond timing. The swimmers should be taught to
along the undersurface of the arm, and down think momentum. By feeling the amount of
the side of the trunk to the hips; the procedure stretch in the flow, each swimmer learns to
should be repeated on the other side of the judge the body’s momentum and know when
body. This exercise will sensitize the hand, to start the stroke. For example, in a short race,
arm, and trunk side to the oncoming flow of the stroke may be started after allowing the
the water. After several days of using a loofah flow to move along only as far as the wrist.
this way, most swimmers experience a noted Over a longer distance and at a slower speed, a
improvement in their sensitivity to the flow of swimmer may let the oncoming flow move
the water. along the forearm before starting into the stroke.

--- Page 135 Text ---
120 Breakthrough Swimming
Swimmers should do flow-shaper drills and out, swimmers should push off from the pool
sensitizing procedures every day as part of the side using the ship-drill posture instead of the
regular workout. Fist swimming should be conventional locked hands. These occasional
done in all strokes at slow and fast speeds. ship pushoffs enable swimmers to test hand
Swimmers should always start the stroke with sensitivity to the pressure of the oncoming
the hand turned outward. The fists should be flow.
tightly clenched throughout. Fist swimming in Swimmers should resensitize their hands
the breaststroke and butterfly is particularly during the workout, especially during the
effective for coaching effective hand-forearm middle stages of the workout or at the onset of
rotation and elbow flexion and also has a posi- fatigue. If this is done, swimmers will complete
tive transfer to the other strokes. the workout with a greater feel for the water.
Swimmers should be aware that sensitivity The coach should not permit swimmers to re-
to flow will vary from day to day. Every work- gard these procedures as a passing fad because
out should start with skin sensitization—hand over the weeks and months, most swimmers
rubbing, the use of a loofah, fist swimming, will experience a pronounced improvement in
tunnel flow (A-OK), and fingertip-pressing technique resulting from their enhanced ability
exercises. Every now and then during the work- to feel and manipulate the flow of the water.

--- Page 136 Text ---
Part III
Advances
in Training

--- Page 138 Text ---
Chapter 7
Progression of
Training Methods
Even talented swimmers need years
of training under well-integrated
controls to produce superior per-
formance. The outstanding feats of
great swimmers attest to the prodi-
gious internal adjustments the hu-
man body can make. Their achieve-
ments are the result of programs
designed to progressively train the
body’s energy systems so that even-
tually a swimmer can cover racing
distances at maximum capacity.
Although organized competition
in track and swimming started about
150 years ago, training methods ad-
vanced more rapidly in track than in
swimming, probably because swim-
mers found they could swim faster
merely by improving their stroke
mechanics. This approach proved
so rewarding to swimmers that they
either did very little training or none
at all. In addition, the opinion pre-
vailed in many quarters that train-
ing too hard would cause burnout.
In this chapter, we will examine
how training evolved from the
primitive methods of Charles
Steedman to the scientific programs
of today. Developments in track
training gradually influenced swim-
ming coaches, and land-based train-
ing supplemented swimming laps,
creating athletes with superior
muscle tone and aerobic and anaero-
bic adaptation.
123

--- Page 139 Text ---
124 Breakthrough Swimming
Training in the 19th Century hang loosely over the diminished surface.
Fat is lost, and muscle is gained; his head
The first detailed account of training methods becomes clearer, his bones larger, harder,
in the swimming literature was contained in and tougher, his sinews stronger. The
Charles Steedman’s A Manual of Swimming, whole contour of his body is improved. In
published in 1867, 13 years after Steedman short, the change for the better in his
emigrated from England to the Australian strength and appearance will both sur-
colony of Victoria. Steedman was the profes- prise and delight him who has just com-
sional swimming champion of England, then pleted his first course of close training (pp.
the world’s leading swimming nation, when 223–224).
he left for Australia, where he became cham-
pion of Victoria. Steedman’s book, colloquially A Daily Training Schedule
known as “the manual,” contained vivid ac-
counts of tough training methods used by great In his A Manual of Swimming, Steedman (1867)
professionals of the day and raised consider- emphasized the role of the trainer to the athlete:
able interest in England and Australia. “A cheerful, yet firm, companion in the trainer is
Steedman described how it was customary indispensable.” Steedman provided the follow-
to commence training with “a course of medi- ing daily schedule for a swimmer in training:
cine.” To “free the stomach and bowels from
5:00 A.M. Rise. Either plunge at once into cold
any injurious accumulation that may be ob-
water or have a sponge bath; be well
structing those organs,” it was sometimes nec-
rubbed down with a dry, coarse
essary to take two, or even three, purges at
towel; dress quickly and eat a hard
intervals from four to six days. The athlete
biscuit or small piece of stale bread.
began by taking an emetic, consisting of 20
5:30 Walk a mile briskly then run uphill
grains of ipecacuanha in a wineglass of water.
for half-a-mile as rapidly as pos-
That was followed in a couple of days by “a
sible; afterward walk for four miles
mild purge,” induced by taking a pill contain-
at a moderate pace.
ing two grains of calomel and five grains of
compound extract colocynth. Steedman men- 7:00 Breakfast. Rump steak or mutton
tioned that some athletes preferred to purge chop, underdone, without fat, and
themselves by taking Glauber’s salts, “an ounce stale bread. Note: rest, or take very
generally sufficing for a dose.” gentle exercise with dumbbells for
the remainder of two hours.
The Effects of Judicious Training
9:00 Walk two miles at a moderate pace;
swim sharply for a quarter-of-an-
Steedman said that the effects of judicious train-
hour or 20 minutes; quickly and thor-
ing were “beneficial, and evident from the fol-
oughly dry with a coarse towel; dress
lowing changes that take place in the person
and walk three or four miles at a
who submits to the necessary discipline:”
moderate speed.
The appetite becomes keener, the process 12:00 P.M. Undress and lie down in bed for
of digestion is easier, the sleep is sounder,
half-an-hour. On rising, take a glass
less disturbed, and more refreshing. The
of old ale or sound sherry and eat a
condition of the lungs is improved; he is
hard biscuit.
enabled to draw a deeper inspiration, to
1:00 Walk four miles.
retain his breath longer, and recover it
sooner after it is lost; in other words, his 2:00 For one hour and a half occupy one-
“wind” is improved. He feels light and self with athletic exercises calculated
cheerful; technically, “corky.” His stom- to develop the muscles of the arms
ach is reduced in size, yet the skin, owing and the trunk.
to its newly-acquired elasticity, does not 3:30 Rest for half-an-hour.

--- Page 140 Text ---
Progression of Training Methods 125
4:00 Dinner. Rump steak or mutton chop “well clothed in flannel at full speed.” After
or a slice or two from a joint of beef finishing the run, swimmers drank what
or mutton, underdone, free from fat; Steedman called “the sweating liquor.” This
stale bread, one or two mealy pota- precursor to sports drinks included “one ounce
toes, and a little greens; no pastry or of caraway seed, half-an-ounce of coriander
cheese. seed, one ounce of root liquorice, and half-an-
ounce of sugar candy, mixed with two quarts of
4:30 Rest till five.
cider, and boiled down to one quart. To this
5:00 Walk a mile sharply; run half-a-mile
some add one drachm of sweet spirits of nitre.”
at top speed; walk four miles at a
After drinking the “sweating liquor,” the
moderate rate.
athlete was to be “put to bed in fresh flannels”
7:00 A half-pint of old ale or wineglass of and “covered up with half-a-dozen pairs of
sherry and hard biscuit. Gymnastics blankets; sometimes even a feather bed in addi-
for the arms and chest till eight. tion is placed over him.” After spending about
8:00 Rest and amusing conversation or half-an-hour in bed, the athlete was to be “taken
light reading till nine. out and rubbed perfectly dry.” Then, after be-
ing dressed in a great coat, the athlete gently
9:00 Body to be well rubbed down with
walked two miles, then returned to a breakfast
coarse towels, then bed till five next
of roast fowl instead of beef. The rest of the day
morning.
he followed the usual schedule. Although some
This schedule, according to Steedman, was trainers in his day had their athletes use the
“based in all essential particulars on the sys- sweating process once a week until seven or
tem so successfully pursued by the celebrated eight days before the contest, Steedman and
Captain Barclay” and would “if so modified other trainers felt it weakened the athlete, and
as to suit age, locality, and previous mode of therefore rarely used it, “except to jockeys, with
life, fairly indicate the method to be adopted whom reduction of weight is of greater impor-
by one who wishes to attain for any specific tance than increase of strength.”
purpose a maximum condition of health and
strength.” Steedman recommended follow- Training in the Early
ing the schedule for no more than four months. 20th Century
He made further claims for his program:
“Slightly altered, so as not to interfere with Andrew “Boy” Charlton, the great Australian
one’s business avocations, and persisted in swimmer of the 1920s, is known to have trained
with regularity throughout the year, it would for only four weeks before a big race, averaging
ensure a good state of health, and, except in a half mile a day. Another famous Australian,
special circumstances, materially aid in pro- Noel Ryan, Empire Champion and 1932 Olym-
longing a man’s life.” pic finalist, told me that the most he ever swam
Steedman’s nutritional advice was strange in a day was 1,000 yards—this was when he
based on current knowledge but at the time was preparing for the 1932 Olympic Games in
was state of the art. He insisted that swimmers Los Angeles. When he arrived at the Olympic
eat ordinary, well-baked water biscuits and venue, he reduced his training distance to 440
drink a little cold water if thirsty. However, yards for fear of burning out.
“All the liquids . . . taken in any one day should Ryan said that he used to sit back at the
not together exceed three pints.” Tobacco and Olympic pool and watch the Japanese team
“spirits” were absolutely prohibited. cover up to five miles daily. According to Ryan,
As a variation to the usual morning sched- the Japanese dominance in 1932 and again at
ule, Steedman advocated what he called “the the Berlin Olympics in 1936 prompted several
sweating process,” which had grown in favor theories: that the Japanese had the ideal build
with trainers and their athletes. Steedman’s for swimming; that they had developed a new
plan called for swimmers to run four miles stroke; and that they were using drugs. The

--- Page 141 Text ---
126 Breakthrough Swimming
main reason for the Japanese dominance, how- coaches, Frank Guthrie, who spearheaded the
ever, was that they trained harder than any Australian revival and coached Lorraine Crapp
other team. Few people showed a desire to to become the first woman to beat the then
copy the Japanese methods; in fact, the Japa- magic five-minute mark for 400 meters, said
nese effort was dismissed by many as fanati- that the Australians had received the idea from
cism. Either through laziness, jealousy, or genu- the Americans.
ine belief, people asked, “Who wants to go to Guthrie’s statement may have been partially
such lengths to succeed?” The truth was that correct. Sydney University professor Frank
the Japanese idea of strenuous training was too Cotton and his understudy Forbes Carlile had
far ahead of its time. read about interval training in track magazines
Shortly thereafter, World War II produced a and research papers. It is also likely that they
brief hiatus in competitive swimming. As inter- had discussed the method with world-class
est in competitive swimming revived in the Australian track athletes, who were already
immediate postwar period, swimmers began using the method.
to realize the importance of improved condi- In 1954, British track athlete Roger Bannister
tioning. Kiphuth had pioneered supplemen- ran the first sub four-minute mile under the
tary land training for swimmers back in 1917, guidance of Franz Stampfl, who advocated a
but a few swimmers now tentatively began to combination of fartlek (speed play), interval,
experiment with weight training. At Ohio State and repetition training. Bannister’s feat cap-
University, champion swimmer Dick Cleve- tured the imagination of followers of many
land practiced weight training five days a week sports, causing great interest in Stampfl’s train-
under the guidance of Fraysher Ferguson at his ing concepts.
gymnasium in Columbus. Al Wiggens was Stampfl’s book Franz Stampfl on Running
another Ohio State swimmer who achieved (1955) and Bannister’s First Four Minutes (1955)
good results under Ferguson’s tutelage, setting were instant bestsellers and were intently stud-
world butterfly and medley records. In 1952 ied by forward-thinking coaches in swimming
Walter Schlueter pioneered weight training for as well as track. Bannister described the pro-
women swimmers with his world-record relay cess through which he had attacked the four-
team at the Town Club of Chicago (Murray and minute barrier for the mile run. In December
Karpovich 1956). 1953, he had started an intensive training pro-
Some swimmers now trained as far as three gram in which he ran a series of 10 consecutive
miles daily. But others, attempting to relieve quarter miles, each in 66 seconds, with two-
some of the inevitable boredom of swimming minute rest intervals between them. Gradually,
long stretches at a comparatively easy pace, through January and February, he stepped up
introduced periods of intermittent faster activ- the pace until by April he could manage the
ity, which can best be described as a form of series in an average time of 60 seconds while
interval training. However, by no stretch of keeping to the two-minute rest intervals.
imagination can these procedures be construed Information on interval training thus prob-
as the first structured and formal application of ably reached Australian swimming coaches
interval training. Nevertheless, during this from several sources. Nevertheless, the Austra-
period there were isolated accounts of noted lians were the first to establish a protocol for
coaches and swimmers inadvertently using using interval training as an accepted and regu-
what can be termed a form of rudimentary lar method of training competitive swimmers.
interval training. In the 1950s, Australian swimming coaches,
John Marshall, in his letters home to Austra- in conjunction with physiologist Frank Cotton,
lia, described the form of interval training used began a methodical study of the interval train-
at Yale University. Some accounts credit ing method used in running since the late 1930s
Marshall’s letters with giving Australian coaches and applied the method to swimming. In a
the idea from which they developed interval manner similar to Woldemar Gerschler’s early
training. In 1956 one of the leading Australian research on interval training for track, the Aus-

--- Page 142 Text ---
Progression of Training Methods 127
tralians attempted to relate heart rate to re- ment of track methods, we gain insight into
corded swimming times at different work-to- similar difficulties encountered in swimming.
rest ratios. Some coaches used heart rate checks There may be some as yet overlooked aspects
in establishing interval training as a formal of track training that can be beneficially adapted
conditioning method for swimmers. to swimming.
Coincidental or not, with the use of interval Competitive running started with competi-
training, swimming took one of its rare quan- tions between England’s Oxford and Cam-
tum leaps forward. Within a matter of months bridge universities. For most of the first 100
in 1956, the Australians almost completely re- years, training emphasized developing endur-
wrote the world-record books for both men ance, but as time passed, it became evident that
and women. The Australian swimmers, train- speed was also important.
ing under six highly innovative coaches—
Forbes Carlile, Arthur Cusack, Gus Frohlich, Gosta Holmer and the Fartlek Method
Harry Gallagher, Frank Guthrie, and Sam
Gosta Holmer (1893–1972), the famous Swed-
Herford—made an almost complete sweep of
ish track coach, developed a naturalistic method
the 1956 Olympic swimming events.
of training he called fartlek (speed play), which
In the first 10 years or so that interval train-
consists of running both quickly and slowly. To
ing was used in swimming, several phases
some extent, fartlek is an informal type of train-
occurred during which the concept, still incom-
ing in which the athlete jogs, walks, runs, or
pletely understood, was misapplied. The total
sprints as he or she wishes. This was particu-
training load was often too great, mainly be-
larly true of its use in early-season training, for
cause in an attempt to strive for even more
which the method established informal fast
speed, coaches tended to demand too great a
and slow cross-country running as a funda-
pace for the repeat swims. The result, recog-
mental form of endurance training.
nized by only a few at the time, was often an
Possibly because the term means “speed
inability by swimmers to recover from what
play,” many people in swimming had the mis-
Carlile termed “failing adaptation,” a condi-
taken impression that fartlek was nothing more
tion that requires either a marked reduction in
than an informal and almost inconsequential
the intensity of the workload or complete rest.
type of training serving little purpose other
Although training methods in swimming
than to produce some basic early-season fit-
developed later than in track, the develop-
ness. On the track, however, fartlek became a
ment, when it came, followed a similar evolu-
more strenuous and demanding form of train-
tionary pattern. In both sports, continued de-
ing as the season progressed.
bate marked the search for the ideal balance
The application of fartlek to swimming ap-
between the volume and intensity of the
pears to have been neither properly under-
workload. The issue remains alive in swim-
stood nor taken seriously enough. Perhaps the
ming as we enter the 21st century.
method has been mistakenly interpreted by
some as a subterfuge for relieving boredom
The Influence of Track Training
while accumulating early-season mileage. In
fact, this kind of training is often termed bulk
The training methods of swimming share an
mileage or garbage, implying a certain mindless
origin with those used on the running track.
approach to the essential task of establishing an
The basic training principles used by modern
extensive aerobic endurance foundation to sea-
competitive swimmers were first developed by
sonal activity.
great track athletes working with renowned
coaches and physiologists such as Holmer, van
Variation of Pace
Aaken, and Gerschler.
Obvious differences exist in the physiologi- The main feature of the fartlek method of train-
cal effects of running and swimming, but by ing is that the pace varies frequently from
looking at problems that beset early develop- short, sharp sprints to long, easy jog-trots, with

--- Page 143 Text ---
128 Breakthrough Swimming
occasional fast quarter miles and sustained tances (also true of swimming technique).
efforts over distances from a half mile to a mile. Holmer always stressed the importance of re-
The emphasis on pace variation served as an lating a runner’s stride to the runner’s speed.
introduction to the more exacting interval train- Properly adapted to swimming training, this
ing on the track that came later. In swimming approach can be used as a challenging and
in the 1960s, Don Gambril, one of America’s effective training tool. Coaches and swimmers
all-time great coaches, laid much emphasis on should be aware of the need to relate stroke
the principle of varying the pace, notably in length and stroke frequency to swimming time
training such fine swimmers as Patti Carretto, and, as conditioning improves, to assess effi-
Gunnar Larsen, and Hans Fassnacht. ciency by relating these factors to heart rate.
The Importance of Individual Coaching The Development of the Will
to Overcome Fatigue
A defining characteristic of the fartlek method
is that it emphasizes the importance of coach- Holmer recognized that the will to overcome
ing the athlete as an individual. Although the fatigue is an additional important factor in
method involves more structure as the season athletic success. Athletes who use the fartlek
progresses, it provides some opportunity for method are allowed to determine how far and
self-knowledge, producing an athlete who may how fast they wish to run, which teaches them
be better at judging the effects of exercise to tolerate fatigue under a variety of physi-
through subjective observation. I believe that ological stresses.
we have tended to neglect this aspect in recent Similarly, Counsilman recognized the need
years when training competitive swimmers. to motivate swimmers to withstand fatigue.
The dictum, “Man, know thyself,” is as perti- Therefore, he created his “hurt-pain-agony”
nent to competitive swimming as to any other scale to assist sensory perception of fatigue at
endeavor. different levels of work intensity—or, as his
Lactate testing, whatever its value may be in swimmers would say, “at different levels of
some quarters, may have been overstressed to suffering.” Counsilman also devised a “hurt-
the exclusion of a more important coaching pain-agony” chart (Counsilman 1968, p. 338)
task—showing swimmers how to recognize, that showed the differences in effort expended
on their own, the intensity of effort at different by hard workers and comfort swimmers dur-
set paces. Learning to know one’s self is the ing practice. Comfort swimmers rarely ven-
most important thing a coach can teach an tured out of the comfort zone and into the pain
athlete who wishes to compete successfully. zone. But the dedicated, hard workers typi-
cally swam straight through the hurt zone,
Relating Stride to Running Speed into the pain zone, and finally into the agony
zone.
The early-season application of fartlek to swim-
ming training has followed formats mostly
Fartlek and the Concept of Tempo Training
concerned with developing basic condition-
ing, but swimming coaches may have neglected Holmer (1972) believed that twice a week a
the additional pace and tempo teaching possi- runner should alternate between one-quarter
bilities the method presents. and one-half racing tempo and during the last
Gosta Holmer began to recognize the impor- month of training use one-half to three-quarter
tance of always relating pace to the training tempo. Holmer estimated the various tempos
effort between 1921 and 1925 when he lived in as follows: suppose a runner’s full tempo is an
Finland, where he had ample opportunity to average speed of 20 seconds per 100 meters for
observe Paavo Nurmi, one of the greatest run- one hour. Decreasing this tempo by 2.5 percent,
ners in track history. 5 percent, and 7.5 percent produces one-fourth,
Holmer correctly believed that a runner one-half, and three-fourths tempos, respectively
learned technique only by running long dis- (see table 7.1).

--- Page 144 Text ---
Progression of Training Methods 129
Table 7.1 Training Tempos
Distance
Tempo 100 m 1,000 m 5,000 m 10,000 m 15,000 m
1/1 20.0 3:20.0 16:40.0 32:20.0 49:00.0
3/4 20.5 3:25.0 17:05.0 34:10.0 51:15.0
1/2 21.0 3:30.0 17:30.0 35:00.0 52:30.0
1/4 21.5 3:35.0 17:55.0 35:50.0 53:45.0
From Holmer 1972. Reprinted by permission.
The Use of Tempo Training in Swimming he wrote an article for Sport und Gymnastik
(reprinted in English in van Aaken and Berben
In the early years of interval training in the
1971). The adherents of his methods were
pool, swimmers used a variation of Holmer’s
known as “The Waldniel School” after the town
long-distance tempo method. To determine the
where he lived.
speed and intensity of effort for an interval
During the 1970s, Australian coach Forbes
series, swimmers calculated a percentage of
Carlile adapted van Aaken’s endurance method
their fastest time for a particular distance—for
with great success. Carlile showed that the
example, 70 percent, 80 percent, or 90 percent.
concept of speed through endurance very much
To assess fitness, swimmers often compared
applied to his proteges Karen Moras, Shane
pulse rate with the recorded time. They also
Gould, and Jenny Turrell, world-record hold-
predicted performance by plotting recorded
ers, at distances from 400 meters to 1,500 meters
time against a total of the heart rates taken at 10-
and for Gould at all distances from 100 meters
second intervals during the first half minute
upward (Carlile 1976).
after exercise (Carlile 1956).
The late 1950s and early 1960s were marked
The Concept of Training for Pure Endurance
by trial and error—mostly error—in the applica-
tion of interval training to swimming. Because According to van Aaken, Emil Zatopek, who
swimmers tended to do interval training at too ran long distances with rhythmical changes of
high a percentage of maximum effort, many speed, exemplified the Waldniel method or
teams often had disappointing results. Coaches classical form of interval training. This method
such as Peter Daland, Sherman Chavoor, Nort enabled Zatopek to win Olympic supremacy in
Thornton, Forbes Carlile, Don Gambril, George 1948. The method introduced the important
Haines, and “Doc” Counsilman gradually came new concept of training for pure endurance,
to appreciate the need for varying the pace and van Aaken said.
intervals according to the physiological effects Zatopek covered distances at relatively slow
they wished their swimmers to achieve. speeds. He daily performed 400-meter runs
broken by 200-meter jogs at sub-racing speed
Ernst van Aaken’s Speed Through over distances between 36 and 50 kilometers.
Endurance Method Occasionally, he would run 400 meters at in-
creased speed.
Ernst van Aaken was a general practitioner in According to van Aaken, critics of the
the small German town of Waldniel. He devel- Zatopek method claimed that it took too much
oped the pure endurance method of training time and did not sufficiently overload the body.
after seeing Paavo Nurmi break the world Thus they increased the quality of work by
record in 1928 for the one-hour run, but he did introducing breaks and reducing the distances
not make his methods public until 1947, when run under stress to 100 and 200 meters. This

--- Page 145 Text ---
130 Breakthrough Swimming
Summary of Holmer’s Fartlek Method
The gradual seasonal progression used in the Holmer method can be easily adapted to the
training of competitive swimmers. Above all, the method is simple. All too often a swimming
training program begins to look more like a detailed thesis or an exposé of a coach’s
knowledge of exercise physiology rather than a plan whose purpose is plain and can be
easily followed. The importance of simplicity in program planning is often overlooked,
which is particularly a problem when coaching the younger swimmer, who should be able
to recognize at a glance the purpose of each phase of a program as well as the progress
made.
Study of Holmer’s plan for a training season shows an initial concentration on building
a broad and well-planned endurance base by means of fartlek training. Later, precise paces
and tempos are gradually introduced. At first, paced work is done at one-fourth tempo. Then,
as the athlete’s fitness increases, the speed increases to one-half tempo. Finally, speed work
is done at three-fourths tempo over almost the full racing distance. Thus there is a subtle
change in the specificity of the training program as it moves from the development of
general aerobic conditioning to establishing the peak season’s final race pace. The work is
applied in cyclic phases, however, depending on each athlete’s individual reactions from
session to session, day to day, and week to week.
Holmer’s program is all-embracing yet notable for the simplicity of its application; indeed,
it would have been surprising had outstanding outcomes not resulted from a program so
clearly modeled on everyday common sense. Most coaches who have produced top world
athletes and swimmers will confirm that their most successful seasonal programs were
those characterized by an essential simplicity that nevertheless took into account a few
basic principles of exercise physiology.
work was done in a long series of repetitions. veloped the capacity for recovery after heavy
They believed this method would develop stress, but this capacity was not specific to
greater endurance, speed, and strength. They performance. He added that it was incorrect to
maintained that for middle- and long-distance assume that increasing total intermittent
racing, it ensured a very quick and effective stresses necessarily resulted in increased ca-
increase in heart size and also improved so- pacity to withstand the continuous and accu-
called muscle endurance. mulative stress that occurred when covering
full distance at racing speed.
Criticism of Interval Training Even Herbert Reindell, one of the develop-
ers of interval training, showed interval train-
In an article that was published in Swimming
ing over short and middle distances caused
Technique, van Aaken said that the whole con-
only moderate increases in heart size, van Aaken
cept of interval training was based on becoming
said. He pointed out that marathon runners, as
used to oxygen debt by doing mainly anaerobic
well as long-distance cyclists and rowers, were
work (van Aaken and Berben 1971). According
found to have the largest hearts. He expressed
to van Aaken, this “improved” interval work—
doubt as to how a long series of short, fast runs
developed, propagated, and made obligatory
could bring about the necessary long-lasting
in Germany—only showed what acute stresses
endurance effects.
athletes were capable of bearing.
Marathon runners training with the interval
Steady State Training
method performed 200-meter runs 170 times in
33 seconds each, van Aaken reported. He The pure endurance training developed by van
claimed that the interval training method de- Aaken involves daily training at a steady state

--- Page 146 Text ---
Progression of Training Methods 131
with the most favorable respiratory conditions, distances will be set by instinct instead of a
without an increase of initial oxygen debt and stopwatch. In addition, all athletes train for the
formation of lactic acid and with an average next event above their racing distance
pulse rate of 130 beats per minute. To achieve (overdistance); an 800-meter runner is expected
this, the athlete performs long runs, initially to be able to achieve a reasonable time over
with short breaks, after the principle of interval 1,500 meters.
training. Later, the athlete runs continuous dis- The longest distance to be covered in train-
tances of 6 to 50 miles. This training method ing was many times longer than the racing
was used for the marathon distance. At the end distance. Runs over these distances were sched-
of the daily run, the method requires a fast run uled at either the beginning or the end of the
at not faster than race pace over part of the week. The 800-meter specialist ran at least 12 to
racing distance. 15 miles; the marathoners, 36, 40, even 48 miles,
to build the foundation to last through 26 miles
The Use of Part Distances at racing speed. During the first years of such
for Tempo Training training, the distances were covered in seg-
ments of two to three miles interspersed with
The ratio set by van Aaken of long unbroken
walking recovery breaks.
runs to shorter distances covered at pace
(tempo) is 20:1. The mileage is shortened or
Speed Through Endurance Training
extended according to an athlete’s preferred
Applied to Swimming
racing distance. The pace is determined by the
runner’s best time. Carlile (1971) believed that swimmers should
A 5,000-meter runner capable of 15 minutes also train over long distances and that if the
would frequently be asked to do five 1,000- distance is reduced and the quality element
meter runs in three minutes each. An 800-meter becomes too intense, a swimmer very easily
runner capable of 1:44.0 would be asked to do will go into failing adaptation. In fact, almost
six 200-meter runs in 26 seconds, and so on. all of Carlile’s work in physiology was oriented
After some practice, the tempo for the part to avoiding too much high-pressure training.
Summary of van Aaken’s Speed Through Endurance
Method
In the speed through endurance method, athletes learn running mainly by running. Track
running is mainly learned by training on level ground.
The most important factor in training for middle and long distances is endurance, which
is a function of maximum oxygen intake capacity, low body weight, and economical
application of the laws of leverage. Endurance is mainly acquired by endurance exercises
at medium speed. This speed is determined by personal endurance limit; during training the
athlete should always perform below this limit. Only occasionally should the endurance
capacity be tested at racing speed.
Continually practicing at speeds faster than race pace is uneconomical and leads to a
decrease of reserves. Speed runs are best practiced at race pace but only over part of the
racing distance. The number of repetitions and breaks and the length of the breaks are
determined by the recovery period.
The interval principle in endurance training is used only to enable the athlete to cover
more distance without fatigue.
All relatively severe anaerobic stresses (e.g., speed runs) should be preceded and
followed by aerobic functions (e.g., light jogging). That is, the athlete should warm up before
speed work and cool down after it.

--- Page 147 Text ---
132 Breakthrough Swimming
Carlile believed there to be a limit to the Pulse Rate as a Guide to Training Intensity
amount of training that should be done at high
Departing from the general trend of his time,
speed. Carlile’s methods were instead based
Gerschler shortened the distance of the longer
largely on the simple concept of keeping a
training runs. Simultaneously, he increased the
constant duration for the twice-daily training
speed for these reduced distances. His formula
sessions (approximately two hours per ses-
for interval training was to have the athlete run
sion) and encouraging swimmers to gradually
100 or 200 meters at a pace three and six sec-
increase the distances they were capable of
onds slower, respectively, than the athlete’s
covering within that fixed time.
best time for the distance. This gives a pulse
In the 1960s, Sherman Chavoor, one of the
rate of 170, plus or minus 10. After the pulse
most highly successful coaches in the history of
drops to 120 beats per minute within a 1-1/2-
American swimming, was an early advocate of
minute rest period, the athlete runs again.
training swimmers along the lines van Aaken
This routine continues until the heart rate
suggested for track athletes (Chavoor 1967).
fails to recover to 120 beats within 1-1/2 min-
Chavoor trained all youngsters for distance
utes. Gerschler, Rosskamm, and Reindell (1964)
swimming. He felt that once they could suc-
claimed the daily repetition of this routine for
cessfully cover long distances, they could work
21 days could increase the heart volume by
back to 400s, 200s, and 100s. Chavoor would
one-fifth. Gerschler said that it was the recov-
point out to those youngsters who initially did
ery period that strengthened the heart, that is,
not like doing 1,500-meter swims in training
while the pulse returns from 180 beats to 120.
that swimmers such as Don Schollander, Mark
Counsilman (1967) described how he talked
Spitz, Carl Robie, and Roy Saari could swim
to Gerschler, who told him that swimming
fast at all distances from 100 to 1,500 meters. He
coaches did not apply the interval training
added that there were very few swimmers who
method properly because they did not make
were just sprinters.
swimmers wait until the heart rate dropped
from 180 to 120 beats per minute. Counsilman
Woldemar Gerschler’s Interval
explained to Gerschler that swimmers work-
Training Method
ing to develop endurance rested for 10 seconds,
those working for both speed and endurance
Woldemar Gerschler (Gerschler, Rosskamm,
rested for 30 seconds, and those working for
and Reindell 1964) said that he developed in-
top speed rested from 1-1/2 to 2 minutes.
terval training through trial and error. He
Gerschler adamantly maintained that the
claimed that interval training produced greater
heart rate must return to 120. In reply to
endurance than running long unbroken dis-
Gerschler, Counsilman posed hypothetical cases
tances—and in a shorter time. When interval
of two different athletes, one with a resting
training was first introduced it was a radical
pulse rate of 50 and the other with a pulse rate
departure from traditional endurance training,
of 70 and asked whether both should try to
yet it often brought dramatic results. Gerschler
attain a 180 pulse rate and wait for it to return to
attributed this to a greater control over the
120. Gerschler replied that this was just a norm.
training overload.
Counsilman went on to point out to Gerschler
Using interval training, Gerschler’s protege
that heart rate targets must always be specific to
Rudolf Harbig set world records before World
the individual and that pulse rates will vary
War II for the 400-meter (46.0), 800-meter
according to the work-to-rest ratio and the con-
(1:46.6), and 1,000-meter events (2:21.5) that
ditioning effect the swimmer wishes to achieve.
were far in advance of the existing standards.
When Gerschler died in 1982, he was acknowl-
The Merits of Different Types of Training
edged as “Gerschler: The Innovator” (Horwill
1982), recognized as being 30 years ahead of his In the 1980s, the Russians Viru and Urgenstein
time when he pioneered his interval training confirmed Gerschler’s findings, which were
methods in 1932. based on checking 3,000 athletes (Horwill 1982).

--- Page 148 Text ---
Progression of Training Methods 133
Over a three-month period, groups of athletes produced neither high enough oxygen debt
were given hill training, interval training, steady levels nor a demand sufficient to improve the
running, and sprinting. The hill runners im- condition of the muscles. According to
proved most, followed by the interval trainers. Gerschler, interval training provided a balance
Few runners today do only one type of train- of both requirements.
ing, but though they do not regard interval Gerschler referred to Reindell’s findings,
training as the only method to use, it remains saying that deep breathing during the interval
an important part of their training schedules. caused venous blood to return to the heart in
greater quantity; the tension diminished and
Gerschler’s Views on the Benefits the systolic volume increased, resulting in an
of Interval Training active stimulus for increasing heart volume.
(This is now generally known as Reindell’s heart
Gerschler, Rosskamm, and Reindell (1964)
expansion stimulus.)
stated that interval training was more advanta-
geous than continuous training because it was
Basic Elements of Gerschler’s Interval
more intensive and therefore more powerfully
Training Method
stimulated the musculature, and because it
provided the opportunity to control more pre- According to Gerschler, the speed at which a
cisely the duration of the effort and the inten- distance should be covered depends on the
sity of the stimulus. recovery of the heartbeat. The character of in-
Gerschler objected to long, slow, uninter- terval training changes when training for sprints
rupted running because he felt the training because longer rests are needed for higher
required to obtain the necessary stimulus was speeds. As for the number of times a training
excessively long. He believed that the monotony run should be repeated, Gerschler said that
of running for hours on end, day after day, was there was no fixed answer because the number
more tiring than the running itself and that the of repetitions increased with an athlete’s adap-
stimulus provided by long, uninterrupted runs tation to training.
Summary of Gerschler’s Interval Training Method
Having conducted several studies on the heart rate recovery that occurs between interval
training repetitions, Gerschler, Rosskamm, and Reindell (1964) claimed to have obtained
positive fixed numbers that put “for the first time in the history of training, exact values at
the disposal of the coach” (p. 31).
Gerschler timed the recovery interval, which he defined as the time necessary for the
heart rate to fall from 180 to 140 to 120 beats per minute. Trained runners who jogged
between efforts required 90 to 45 seconds recovery, whereas those who rested passively
needed 70 to 30 seconds.
Gerschler felt that applying interval training to adolescents required considerable care
because young persons in full development are subject to the inexorable demands of growth
and maturation. Comparisons were needed between the postexercise resting heart rates of
young people and those of well-trained adults.
According to Gerschler, interval training was superior to long-distance running for
increasing endurance because interval training takes less time than any other method,
interval training can be dosed precisely and measured accordingly, and interval training
provides more stimulus than long-distance running by itself. Gerschler said these claims
were substantiated by research on endurance and interval training conducted in the former
East Germany (Schleusing, Rebentisch, and Schippel 1964).

--- Page 149 Text ---
134 Breakthrough Swimming
Gerschler and his colleagues (1964) regarded thon training for middle-distance athletes. In
the duration of the rest interval as an important spite of this, their programs were in fact much
factor. The recovery interval is based on the broader and heterogeneous than cursory study
time the heart takes to recover. Using five- would first indicate.
second pulse rate counts, he conducted a one-
year study in which he tested the cardiac fre- The Search for an Ideal Training
quency of hundreds of specialist runners of all Format
distances, ranging from world-class perform-
ers to relatively unknown athletes. Many authorities doubt that a selective method
Gerschler concluded that the stimulus re- for applying the training program will ever be
sulting from a correct combination of distance, found. When interval training was first intro-
speed, and rest interval produced pulse rates duced, many advocates emphasized that it
around 180 beats per minute. According to enabled more work to be done in much less
Gerschler, these findings compared favorably time than did prolonged long-distance train-
with the continuous clinical controls established ing. A survey of the writings and presentations
by Reindell (Gerschler, Rosskamm, and Reindell at major international conferences by the origi-
1964). He thus claims that the elements of inter- nators of interval training leaves little doubt
val training are effectively proportioned when that by “more work” they meant a greater
the heart rate is around 180. stimulation of the heart as well as a more
immediate and intensive overload of the work-
ing muscles.
A Comparative Appraisal
At the Duisberg Congress on Running,
of Track Training Methods
Gerschler, Rosskamm, and Reindell (1964) pre-
sented a paper titled “Das Interval Training”
Track authorities have conducted a long-last-
(Interval Training) setting out the principles of
ing and sometimes even acrimonious debate
the Freiburg method. At this conference, Herbert
concerning the most effective training meth-
Reindell, one of the founders of the interval
ods, some promoting continuous long-distance
training method, sounded a note of warning to
running with occasional speed bursts—as ad-
those who would mercilessly and too liberally
vocated by Holmer, van Aaken, and Lydiard—
apply it.
and others favoring the classic interval training
of the Gerschler method, also known as the Possible Adverse Effects
Freiburg School.
of Interval Training
In fact, a detailed look at the training meth-
ods used by the different schools of thought Reindell expressed concern that interval train-
shows that they all used a mix of distance ing, with its potential for producing severe
running and interval speed work. Although anaerobic metabolism, could easily have re-
this speed training did not always include ac- sults other than expected, if incorrectly ap-
tual breaks between runs, the interval was plied. He said that although heart volume in-
marked by a period of easy jogging or walking creases quickly through interval training,
also known as active rest. performances often remain static or even re-
Apparently, a tendency by popular writers gress.
to play up the more obvious characteristics of a Many athletes trained in this method had
particular method to the exclusion of other quickly become expert at interval training but
components left many with a less-than-com- little more. They had developed a specific ca-
plete understanding of the total programs. For pacity for quick recovery between heavy
example, the mention of Holmer instantly pro- workloads, but though this may have indi-
duced the notion of fartlek, or speed play, van cated superior physiological conditioning, there
Aaken’s name became synonymous with mile- often was not a corresponding improvement
age mania, and Arthur Lydiard’s with mara- when racing. Obviously, either something was

--- Page 150 Text ---
Progression of Training Methods 135
wrong in the seasonal application of training slow paces. They said that to run distances
methods, the workload was incorrectly ap- from 400 to 1,500 meters requires more than a
plied in the actual interval training sessions, or daily training base of steady state running with
both. no oxygen debt and an average pulse rate of 120
to 130 beats per minute.
Learning From Practical Experience Most of the popular systems in use on the
track were improved by learning from practi-
As mentioned earlier, advocates of the fartlek cal experience, especially from the experiences
and speed through endurance training meth- of talented athletes. Knowledge probably ad-
ods were not slow to criticize interval training vances best in this way because scientific expla-
using the previous arguments. nation can hardly be expected to keep pace
Proponents of interval training returned the with the successful methods discovered in prac-
volley by saying that long-distance aerobic tice—it nearly always follows later. Track
training makes for expert joggers and expert coaches nevertheless took caution in extolling
conversationalists because of the ease with the virtues of any particular approach to the
which athletes can talk while running at such exclusion of new ideas.

--- Page 152 Text ---
Chapter 8
Principles of
Modern Training
In a trained athlete, the physiologi-
cal mechanisms of exercise appear
to function more effectively. Al-
though the details of this process of
adaptation are not fully understood,
many specific effects are now well
substantiated. Broadly stated, these
include increased cardiac output
and reduced pulse rates for any
given workload, increased muscu-
lar capillarization and more effec-
tive oxygen utilization and energy
expenditure mechanisms, increased
local (skeletal) muscular strength
and endurance, and improved neu-
romuscular coordination and
greater mechanical efficiency for any
given workload.
In this chapter, we look at some
principles guiding modern training
programs, such as the principle of
overload, overdistance training, and
periodization. Interval training
(which includes sprint training, rep-
etition training, fast interval train-
ing, and slow interval training) was
a major breakthrough in preparing
swimmers for competition, for it al-
lowed a swimmer to train under
heavier but controlled workloads.
Tapering, the concept of planning
rest periods during training, also
revolutionized training by allowing
swimmers to recover prior to im-
portant competitions.
137

--- Page 153 Text ---
138 Breakthrough Swimming
The Overload Principle Failing adaptation may be countered by re-
ducing the workload—by swimming at a slower
The overload principle accounts for the general pace, increasing the amount of rest, or reducing
phenomenon of adaptation to stress. Overload the distance swum in training. Excessive local
refers to a workload greater than that to which stress should be diverted, but excessive total
the body is accustomed, or more precisely, one stress requires complete rest (Selye 1956). Di-
for which the oxygen intake is inadequate to version can consist of varying the format of the
supply the needs of the body. The overload training schedule and the strokes swum in
principle states that increases in muscle size training. In extreme cases where diversion is
(hypertrophy), strength, and endurance result inadequate to counter failing adaptation to
from an increase in work intensity within a stress, the athlete may require complete rest
given time unit (see page 154). from training and unnecessary daily activities.
Hypertrophy occurs only when a muscle Some swimmers have been shown to benefit
performs work at an intensity greater than from bed rest immediately before a big meet,
usual. An increase in the work duration with- but an intelligently planned training program
out a corresponding increase in intensity pro- will not require such extreme measures.
duces no effect. In general, training effects are Specificity of training is a fundamental prin-
specific to the workload. For example, an in- ciple of training but was only vaguely under-
creased training effect cannot be obtained stood in the early days of formal training pro-
merely by prolonging the activity; the speed of grams. People realized that to be able to swim
the activity must also be increased to produce fast, athletes should practice swimming fast
a training effect. and that to have endurance, they should prac-
Progressive overload is the gradual and pro- tice swimming long distances; but the principle
gressive increase in workload in accordance of specificity is far more complex than merely
with the body’s capacity to resist stress. To following these two concepts.
improve performance, training should aim at Training effects are specific to the type of
progression but always within the individual workload placed on the body. Brouha (1945)
athlete’s fund of adaptive energy. studied this concept of training and reports
Adaptation is the gradual process of the body that athletes in one sport require time to adapt
overcompensating to overload stresses, during to and reach maximum efficiency in another
which the body undergoes functional and con- sport, even when equally skilled in both activi-
stitutional changes. In adjusting to increased ties. Indeed, specificity applies between sports
stress, the body draws on its fund of adaptation and between events within sports; it applies
energy. both to learning the precise skills and paces of
Failing adaptation is the body’s inability to a sport and to conditioning the body to perform
cope with overload stress and can result from at maximum capacity in the different events
several causes, particularly a too-rapid increase within a sport.
in the training workload based on a seriously According to Selye (1956), specificity refers
misjudged ideal balance between volume and to a few units within a system, implying that
intensity. But failing adaptation can also rise training should be planned according to a pur-
from such hidden stresses as inadequate rest or pose, whether the purpose is to establish de-
nutrition, emotional stress, or the inexorable sired physiological effects through training the
demands of growth. appropriate energy systems of the body, to
The body makes certain adjustments and form skills, to swim a race at a certain speed, or
changes in adapting itself to prolonged stress. to use certain strategies and paces in competi-
Coaches must be able to recognize differences tion. Within a single daily workout, appropri-
among individuals in this respect. Applying ate time should be allocated for training spe-
the proper volume and intensity of exercise cific aspects of the body. As the season
stress will produce the optimal amount of spe- progresses, emphasis given to specific physi-
cific adaptation for each person. ological requirements should gradually change

--- Page 154 Text ---
Principles of Modern Training 139
according to the swimmer’s improving fitness swimmer. Swimmers were found capable of
and the event(s) to be swum in competition. withstanding much greater workloads than
Each event of the competitive swimming pro- previously believed possible.
gram requires a certain balance between speed Interval training involves swimming fixed
and endurance, which naturally varies among distances at a fixed pace with fixed rest inter-
individuals. vals, thus providing control of the duration
Specificity does not refer merely to prepar- and intensity of effort. Increased quality of
ing for a particular competitive event, nor is the effort should result when a longer rest period is
establishment of general physiological fitness provided between swims. Generally speaking,
the only requirement; rather, specificity takes the higher the quality of a set of interval swims,
the form of the particular quality being empha- the fewer the repetitions that can be accom-
sized during any phase of seasonal activity, plished.
whether it’s endurance training or specialized Conversely, it’s possible to produce a greater
training for the season’s important competi- quantity of work when shorter rest periods are
tions. Thus, a swimmer should first build a set between longer sets of interval swims. The
broad base of endurance. Once the endurance prolonged activity reduces the intensity of ef-
base is established, the program gradually fort.
changes in format to include a carefully planned In summary, the two options are as follows:
balance of duration and intensity of effort. These
1. Quality swimming involves long rest pe-
considerations are vital, as training at too high
riods, which permit high-speed activity,
a level of intensity can easily result in failing
the intensity of which limits the dura-
adaptation to the exercise stress; in fact, train-
tion of the activity.
ing at very high levels of intensity should form
only a small percentage of the seasonal activity. 2. Quantity swimming involves short rest
Different types of work produce different periods, which permits only submaximal
physiological effects. The different systems of speeds to be maintained. The reduced
the body do not adapt to training at the same speed enables the activity to be pro-
speed. An increase in capillarization, for ex- longed, thereby enhancing development
ample, may occur within days, whereas heart of endurance.
muscle takes years to condition properly. The
This is a sketch of the ideal criteria for pro-
establishment of effect is a loose term used to
ducing specific training effects, but the human
describe specific adaptation resulting from
factor—the swimmer’s level of motivation,
training.
drive, and dedication—will contribute to the
Training has a cumulative effect. The posi-
success or failure of the activity.
tive effects of training do not appear the very
next day after a workload has been applied.
Types of Interval Training
Adaptation to the stress of training is a gradual
process and requires time to produce the de- Various training effects can be achieved by
sired biological changes. applying different work-to-rest ratios. There
are four basic types of interval training:
Interval Training
1. sprint training,
Interval training superseded the older type of 2. repetition training,
training in which swimmers did long continu- 3. fast interval training, and
ous distances at a comparatively slower pace.
4. slow interval training.
The originators of interval training found that
by breaking up the training into comparatively
Sprint Training
shorter periods of activity, with intervening
rest periods of varying duration, it was pos- Sprint training consists of short distances swum
sible to place a greater training overload on the at top speed. Although speed starts to slow

--- Page 155 Text ---
140 Breakthrough Swimming
after about 50 meters, distances up to 100 meters should not exceed 250 to 300 meters. Because
are commonly called sprints and are treated as high-intensity repeat swimming can be very
such for the purpose of speed training. Sprint stressful and send a swimmer into failing adap-
training is usually done in multiples of 25-, 50-, tation, the training set should not exceed a total
or 100-meter sets. The heart rate should be distance of 1,000 meters or be presented more
allowed to recover to 100 beats per minute or than twice a week in the workout schedule.
below after each swim. Here are basic examples of repetition train-
Work-to-rest ratios from 1:5 to 1:10 should ing sets:
permit adequate rest to enable training to em-
(cid:2)
15 50 (3 minutes rest)
phasize speed. The ratio chosen depends on
(cid:2)
what percentage of top speed the swimmer 10 100 (5 minutes rest)
wishes to attain. In sprint training the swim- 6 (cid:2) 150 (5 to 10 minutes rest; the last two 150-
mer on occasion may try to swim at 100 percent meter swims should be faster than the
of best time, especially over 25s and 50s. Sprint swimmer’s 150 split recorded on the
training attempts to develop speed and muscu- swimmer’s fastest 200-meter swim)
lar strength and power as well as the ability to (cid:2)
4 250 (10 minutes rest; the last two 250
tolerate oxygen debt.
repeats should be faster than the swimmer’s
Here are some basic examples of sprint train-
250 split recorded on the swimmer’s best
ing sets:
time for 400 meters. The swimmer’s time at
8 (cid:2) 25 (2 minutes rest) the 200 mark will usually accord with the
(cid:2) 200-meter pace recommended to the swim-
4 50 (5 minutes rest)
mer by physiologists for the purpose of high-
(cid:2)
4 100 (10 minutes rest)
lactate training.)
Repetition Training Note. Applying the last two sets twice weekly
during the hard training season can be particu-
Repetition training consists of simulating the
larly effective in improving a swimmer’s times
race pace by swimming distances shorter than
for the 200- and 400-meter events, respectively,
the racing distance at a pace faster than the pace
possibly because a swimmer becomes accus-
of the total racing distance. However, any kind
tomed to tolerating the higher levels of lactate
of training in which the heart rate is permitted
that probably start to accumulate around the
to recover to approximately 110 to 100 before
150 mark in the 200 and the 250 mark in the 400.
the next swim may be classified as repetition
training.
Fast Interval Training
When performed at high enough speeds,
repetition training accustoms the swimmer to Fast interval training consists of work-to-rest
anaerobic exercise in that there is an increase of ratios of about 1:1, permitting the swimmer to
oxygen debt and an accumulation of higher develop speeds approximately 80 percent of
levels of lactate in the working muscles. Repeti- best pace. At least theoretically, this ratio en-
tion training also increases speed and muscu- ables the equal development of speed and en-
lar strength and power. durance.
The work-to-rest ratio should be at least 1:3 Fast interval training introduces a signifi-
to permit speeds approximately 90 to 95 per- cant element of speed to any prolonged activ-
cent of a swimmer’s racing speed. To develop a ity. It simulates to a high degree the type of
high level of blood lactate, the swimmer needs stress experienced in racing events, which
to exert close to 100 percent effort. The heart makes great demands on aerobic and anaero-
rate also should reach maximum, somewhere bic endurance. In fast interval training, the
in the range of 190 to 200. heart rate after each swim will be around 160 to
So that the swimmer can maintain a high 190. The heart rate should be permitted to
enough level of work intensity, the distances recover to approximately 120 to 130 before the
used in high-lactate repeat swimming ideally next swim.

--- Page 156 Text ---
Principles of Modern Training 141
Although the rest period in fast interval train- Straight Sets
ing is shorter than that permitted in sprint and
A straight set is a series of swims done at near
repetition training, it is much longer than in
(cid:2)
constant speed—for example, 16 100 (each
slow interval training. Fast interval training
100 in 62 seconds) with 30 seconds rest.
develops heart muscle and the ability of skel-
etal muscle to tolerate oxygen debt.
Descending Sets
Here are basic examples of fast interval train-
ing sets: A descending set is a series of repeat swims in
which each subsequent swim is done progres-
(cid:2)
30 50 (30 to 60 seconds rest) (cid:2)
sively faster—for example, 20 50 (30 seconds
(cid:2)
15 100 (30 to 120 seconds rest) rest) descending (first 50 in 35 seconds, twenti-
8 (cid:2) 200 (30 to 120 seconds rest) eth 50 in 28 seconds).
(cid:2) A variation of this method is to post the
8 400 (1 to 3 minutes rest)
(cid:2)
workout item on the board as 20 50 (30
(cid:2)
4 800 (3 to 5 minutes rest)
seconds rest), 1-4 descending. This means the
swimmer will decrease the time over the first
Slow Interval Training
four 50s and repeat the process four more times
Slow interval training, which consists of rela- until 20 swims have been completed.
tively slow activity designed to improve aero- Yet another variation of descending sets is to
bic endurance, is based on the endurance de- decrease the average time for each set of repeat
velopment principle of prolonging the activity swims by starting each subsequent set with a
and gradually trying to increase the speed of faster first 50 than in the preceding set and then
the prolonged activity as the season progresses. continuing to decrease the second, third, and
Slow interval training involves swimming at fourth 50 accordingly.
speeds of approximately 60 to 70 percent of In this type of training, however, the first
best pace for the distance. Speed of the swims repeats in a set are sometimes swum too slowly
is limited by the short rest periods. Activity to warrant intervening rest periods. In the pre-
(cid:2)
continues for at least 20 minutes to ensure that vious example, namely, 20 50 for a total
the intensity of effort is kept primarily at the distance of 1,000 meters (or yards), it might be
aerobic level. Activity may continue for one to better to swim the first half of each set continu-
two hours when used to lay the early-season ously without rest intervals and then complete
endurance foundation. The heart rate after each the second half of the distance as a descending
swim will be approximately 160 to 170, but the set of equal multiples.
recovery rate will be in the range of 150 to 160. For example, the athlete would perform a
Here are basic examples of slow interval 250 continuous swim at a fast pace followed
(cid:2)
training sets: immediately by 5 50 descending (30 seconds
rest), repeating the set for a total of 1,000 meters.
(cid:2)
30 50 (10 to 15 seconds rest)
(cid:2)
15 100 (10 to 15 seconds rest) Broken Sets
(cid:2)
8 200 (10 to 20 seconds rest)
A broken set is a series of swims in which the
(cid:2)
8 400 (15 to 30 seconds rest) total distance is broken into sectors with short
4 (cid:2) 800 (15 to 30 seconds rest) rest intervals between them, for example, 400
meters broken at each 100 with 10 seconds rest.
Various Applications of Interval At the end of the swim, deduct 30 seconds (the
Training total amount of rest) from the gross time to
obtain actual swimming time.
Interval training can be applied in many ways, Broken swims are highly motivating and can
including straight sets, descending sets, bro- be used to break up all training distances. Sev-
ken sets, pyramids, permutations, simulators, eral broken swims can be used to form a train-
and negative splits. ing set by providing a long rest after each swim,

--- Page 157 Text ---
142 Breakthrough Swimming
thus combining repetition training and inter- Swim 200 medley, rest 3 minutes
val training. Another interesting variation is to
Swim 400 medley
perform a set of broken swims in a descending
series, reducing the gross time for each subse- Permutations
quent swim.
Permutations are swims broken at irregular
Here are some further examples:
sectors of the total distance. The following are
(cid:2)
8 400 broken at the 50 with 10 seconds rest examples of permutations of 400 meters in a 50-
and 5 minutes rest after each 400 meter pool (eight lengths of the pool to com-
8 (cid:2) 200 individual medley broken at the 50 plete 400 meters). The workout items are posted
(cid:2)
with 10 seconds rest and 3 minutes rest after on the board as 4 400 meters (perm) (5
each 200 medley minutes rest after each 400).
(cid:2) (cid:2)
2 150 going straight through into 2 50 (a
2-2-2-2 (10 seconds rest)
broken 400 with 10 seconds rest between
4-2-1-1 (10 seconds rest)
each sector) and 5 minutes rest after each 400
1-2-3-2 (10 seconds rest)
(cid:2)
8 100 with 10 seconds rest after each 100, 5
4-1-1-1-1 (10 seconds rest)
minutes rest after each set, and sets 1 through
4 descending
The pace is kept constant on three- or four-
length segments but increased on one- and
Pyramids
two-length segments.
I developed and used this method and found
The pyramid format is a set of swims divided
it effective for developing a swimmer’s ability
into irregular distance sectors and rest periods.
to change pace or accelerate tactically at any
The swimmer may keep the same pace in each
stage of a race; alternatively, the pace can be
swim or vary the pace by going faster on the
held constant for all sectors. The method can
shorter sectors. Three examples follow.
also be used for teaching negative splitting (see
Example 1 Negative Splits, p. 143). Whatever procedure is
used, permutations (“perms”) provide an op-
Swim 50, rest 10 seconds
portunity to practice a variety of paces.
Swim 100, rest 20 seconds
Swim 200, rest 40 seconds Simulators
Swim 400, rest 1 minute
The simulator is a method used to replicate the
Swim 200, rest 40 seconds desired pace of a specific racing distance
Swim 100, rest 20 seconds (Counsilman 1968). Basically, the procedure is
to cover half the racing distance at the desired
Swim 50
pace before stopping for a short rest that per-
Example 2 mits the heart rate only a slight recovery. The
swimmer then covers half the amount of dis-
Swim 400, rest 3 minutes
tance already covered before stopping for an-
(cid:2)
Swim 2 200, rest 2 minutes
other short rest. The pattern continues until
(cid:2)
Swim 2 100, rest 1 minute some arbitrarily small segment remains for the
Swim 2 (cid:2) 50, rest 30 seconds total to equal the racing distance.
For example, suppose the racing distance
Example 3
being practiced is 400 meters. The training
schedule would look like this:
(Individual medley in 25-meter pool)
Swim 400 medley, rest 5 minutes Swim 200 meters, rest 10 seconds
Swim 200 medley, rest 3 minutes Swim 100 meters, rest 5 seconds
Swim 100 medley, rest 1 minute Swim 50 meters, rest 5 seconds

--- Page 158 Text ---
Principles of Modern Training 143
Swim 25 meters, rest 5 seconds within a prescribed time, which, after all, is
what speed swimming is about.
Swim 25 meters
Fartlek (see chapter 7) was adopted by swim-
Note. The rest interval is reduced in this mers as an informal early-season conditioning
example from 10 to 5 seconds before the shorter exercise. Used this way, most of the distance is
segments of the racing distance. covered at an easy pace, with intermittent bursts
of speed using such devices as changing stroke
Negative Splits
and pace after a certain number of lengths.
Chapter 7 describes how to use fartlek training
Swimming the second half of a racing distance
to greater purpose and effect by setting more
faster than the first half (usually two to three
definite requirements.
seconds faster) is known as a negative split. Its
purposes are to delay the onset of oxygen debt
and to teach evenly paced swimming. In a Tethered Swimming,
sense, the negative split also pays back the
or Sprint-Resisted Training
momentum of the starting dive in the first half
of a racing distance.
Tethered swimming (also known as sprint-re-
sisted training) was first used 50 years ago at
Other Types of Training
the Chicago Towers Club when Stan Brauninger,
coach to 1936 Olympic backstroke champion
Many of the following options provide unique
Adolph Kiefer, attached canvas belts with long
training benefits and add variety to the training
elastic bands around the midriffs of his swim-
schedule.
mers. In the 1940s, coach Harold Minto of the
Broadly stated, overdistance swims are twice
Firestone Country Club, Akron, Ohio, trained
as long as the distance for which a swimmer is
the first postwar Olympic 1,500-meter cham-
training. For example, a swimmer whose spe-
pion, James McLane, in a canvas harness con-
cialty is the 100-meter event practices
nected to several yards of elastic aircraft shock
overdistance swimming by doing 200-meter
absorber cord. In the 1940s, Robert Kiphuth
swims. (A 1,500-meter swimmer would also
suspended scores of elastic stretch bands from
be doing overdistance training when swim-
the balcony of the Yale University pool for his
ming 3,000 meters continuously, although
swimmers to use in the water below (Kiphuth
there’s no 3,000-meter event in the competi-
1942). In similar vein, Santa Clara’s George
tive program.)
Haines had his swimmers use latex surgical
Locomotives provide pace variations over dif-
tubing (type 202) for stretch cord exercises on
ferent segments of a total nonstop swim. They
land.
are an excellent early-season conditioning exer-
In the late 1950s and the 1960s, the use of
cise and a useful diversion during the stress of
tethered swimming became sporadic, but it
hard midseason training. Here is one example:
was revived in the mid-1970s by Randy Reese,
Swim 1 lap fast, 1 lap slow the renowned University of Florida coach. Reese
experimented with several new in-water drills
Swim 2 laps fast, 2 laps slow
using 1/8-inch thick surgical tubing that had a
Swim 3 laps fast, 3 laps slow
3/32-inch inside diameter and was cut into
Swim 4 laps fast, 4 laps slow sections of 18 to 22 feet. He repopularized the
Swim 3 laps fast, 3 laps slow use of tethered swimming throughout the world
(Colwin 1984c).
Swim 2 laps fast, 2 laps slow
Tethered swimming was used originally to
Swim 1 lap fast, 1 lap slow
improve the muscular power necessary for
Time swimming, an effective method of sprint swimming, but research suggested that
developing increased endurance, is basically swimming against an increased resistance actu-
increasing the distance a swimmer can cover ally slowed muscle speed instead of increasing

--- Page 159 Text ---
144 Breakthrough Swimming
it (Maglischo 1982). In light of this, Counsilman work should not be planned more than one
(1986) used the method for aerobic training of week in advance; even then a coach may decide
distance swimmers only. He prescribed selected to change the intensity of a workout based on
periods of activity such as three five-minute on-the-spot observation of a swimmer’s reac-
segments with one-minute rest intervals and tion to a previous workload. Workouts are
cut rubber stretch cord to approximately one- monitored by means of measuring blood lac-
third the length of the pool, with allowances for tate in only a few teams, and for most pro-
size and strength of the swimmer and elasticity grams, this phase of coaching remains an art
of the cord. instead of a science. When a program is under
Like so many other swimming training meth- the direction of an experienced coach, how-
ods, the concept behind speed-assisted training ever, it’s often remarkable how a well-balanced
came from track—in this case, the use of such pattern of easy, moderate, and strenuous ses-
methods as towing, downhill running, and sions appears consistently over a period of
treadmill running at accelerated speed. Ernest many weeks.
Maglischo (1982) referred to a variation of the Several researchers, notably Kindermann
use of tethered swimming for improving sprint (1978), Matveyev (1981), Harre (1982), and
swimming speed. He described how leading Berger (1982), have studied the periodization
coaches Randy Reese and Nort Thornton used of the training program. As a result, it is com-
the method in their programs. The swimmer mon in Eastern Europe for training preparation
first swam down the pool, stretching the tub- to be viewed in the context of three distinct
ing, and then allowed it to snap back on the cycles—microcycles of one week duration,
return, thus assisting the swimmer to swim at a mesocycles of three to seven weeks duration,
faster speed than normally possible. Counsil- and macrocycles, one to four per year up to four
man (1986) developed a system of anaerobic years.
lactate training by having the swimmers use During the 1960s and 1970s several leading
(cid:2)
repeat swims such as 10 50 on two to three programs, mainly in Europe, adopted a new
(cid:2)
minutes or 5 100 on three to five minutes terminology to describe the various phases of
while attached to stretch cords. He instructed seasonal training. For example, Igor Koshkin
the swimmers to swim diagonally across the (1985), coach of the great Soviet 1,500-meter
pool to avoid becoming entangled in the cords world-record holder Vladimir Salnikov, de-
when returning down the pool. The method scribed a typical training year as being divided
was not practical in a 50-meter pool because the into five spirals, each having a duration of 8 to
cords would not stretch tightly enough, and the 12 weeks and ending with a one- to three-week
course was too long for sprinting. competition period.
Counsilman (1986) devised another varia- Each spiral comprises two-week develop-
tion of the method wherein sprinters pulled ment stages called mesocycles. Each mesocycle
themselves along the lane markers to the other concentrates on developing specific qualities
end of the pool and then rested before allowing in the swimmer. During the last mesocycle—
the taut stretch cord to snap back and give them the preparation for major competition—the
a speed-assisted sprint back to the starting aim is to integrate all the specific qualities
point. developed in the four or five preceding
mesocycles.
Periodization of the Training
Search for a
Program
Selective Method of Applying
Varying the intensity and duration of workouts the Training Workload
from day to day and week to week results in a
long-term cyclic application of the training pro- The erstwhile East German sports regime de-
gram. The days of easy, moderate, and hard veloped a method of blood lactate analysis.

--- Page 160 Text ---
Principles of Modern Training 145
One method for determining the lactate/ was to swim long, unbroken mileage with wind
ventilatory threshold* involves timing evenly sprints—usually a series of 50s interspersed
paced swims at 200 or 300 meters, some of with rest periods—performed at the end of a
which are done at an easy pace. The pace is then workout to introduce an element of speed.
slightly increased to a moderate intensity just Some thought that if a lot of mileage gave
above the lactate/ventilatory threshold. Finally, good results, then more would give even better.
much faster swims at almost 100 percent of Of course, this was not always true. What they
maximum effort are performed. found was that swimmers often carried consid-
As few as two blood lactate concentrations erable residual fatigue over long periods. They
are plotted against the velocities of the test swims, saw that they needed an adjustment to the
and the lines joining them are extrapolated to training regimen that would enable swimmers
cut the 4 mmol/L blood lactate level. The esti- to produce their best performances in impor-
mated velocity at 4 mmol/L is read off to predict tant competitions.
the exercise intensity for each individual The introduction of alternating easy and hard
swimmer’s lactate/ventilatory threshold. training days was an attempt to permit a mea-
East German coaches regularly used the 10 sure of adaptation in the midst of strenuous
(cid:2)
200 anaerobic test on their swimmers. Study- training, but swimmers still did not obtain
ing the nature of the lactate velocity curve sufficient rest to perform at their best. Never-
helped them assess at regular intervals the theless, the idea of alternating days of easier
changing aerobic and anaerobic capacities of and harder work was to lead to experiments
individual swimmers throughout the training with even longer rests.
season. In addition, they were able to deter-
mine a swimmer’s ability to reach a high lactate Basic Concept of the Taper
level with a maximum-effort performance. The
purpose of the procedure was to test a Carlile’s interest in Selye’s concepts of stress
swimmer’s mobilization capacity, or the high- (Selye 1956) combined with his own studies of
est level of blood lactate the swimmer is able to failing adaptation to stress (Carlile 1963)
generate. The East Germans maintained that prompted him to provide his swimmers with
this scientific approach to training enabled them far more rest before competition than was pre-
to make very accurate judgments concerning viously thought necessary. This period of re-
the training condition of a swimmer right duced activity became known as the taper. The
through the season, up to and including the beneficial effects of tapering on performance
final precompetition tapering-off period. became clear to coaches once they learned to
taper swimmers skillfully.
Tapering for Competition During the 1970s and 1980s, the tapering
process grew more complex for several rea-
In the early years of competitive swimming, sons, one of them being the increased fre-
swimmers took little if any extra rest prior to a quency of top international competition. Of-
major competition other than retiring earlier ten, radical changes had to be made to already
on the previous night. It was not uncommon busy regional and national schedules. Prepar-
for training, such as it was, to be continued up ing swimmers to compete successfully in a
to the day before a meet. series of topflight competitions became a fine
In the early 1950s, swimmers began to in- art—and only partially a science. Many swim-
crease distances covered in training. As the mers chose to swim through (either not taper
quantity of work increased, they found they or use a reduced taper) for some meets and
could swim faster. At this time, the tendency then taper completely to swim at a higher level
* Note. Once again following the lead of track and field athletics, swimming scientists are beginning to replace the term anaerobic threshold
with lactate/ventilatory threshold. The former term refers nonspecifically to the upper limits of aerobic work, whereas the latter refers to
measurable levels of blood lactate and ventilatory capacity.

--- Page 161 Text ---
146 Breakthrough Swimming
in others. In addition, many lower-ranked The body then overcompensates in its adapta-
swimmers tapered in midseason, attempting tion to stress, enabling a superior performance.
to meet required qualifying times for entries to During the taper, attention should be given
championship and major meets. to every aspect of preparation—mental as well
as physical—including mental attitude, physi-
Principle Considerations cal conditioning, stroke technique, pace, and
in Tapering strategy. Finally, the effects of rest on adapta-
tion should be understood. Rest is a vital deter-
Before a major competition, swimmers gradu- minant of performance and just as important as
ally reduce their heavy workload and increase an ideal balance among different levels of work
their rest. This period is known as the taper intensity.
(Carlile 1963) or tapering off. The transition to A note of caution: for young swimmers, ex-
easier work causes the adaptive processes of cess energy levels that result from tapering often
the body to overcompensate as the swimmer cause a tendency to indulge in horseplay. The
prepares for maximum effort. The word taper— coach should forewarn the team against wild or
diminishing toward the end—aptly describes unruly behavior, calling it “excessive exuber-
the process. Its use in training was coined by ance,” that could cause injury and the conse-
Frank Cotton, professor of physiology at the quent waste of a whole season of preparation.
University of Sydney, Australia, and his under- The entire season should be mapped out in
study at the time, Forbes Carlile, now the dean advance and major and minor meets decided.
of Australian swimming coaches. The program design should include the dura-
These two pioneers discovered that for physi- tion and emphasis of each training cycle with
ological adaptation to occur, arduous training adequate time for the final taper.
must be tempered with adequate rest. The con-
cept of tapering is based on this realization, and Typical Questions on Tapering
over a period of more than 30 years, it has
Here are some typical questions a coach often
proved to be one of the most significant contri-
encounters during the taper phase of the sea-
butions to the progress of competitive swim-
son:
ming. Tapering was first described in the litera-
ture—and in detail—by Carlile (1963). Both the
How long should each swimmer taper?
concept and the term were quickly accepted
Should all swimmers taper the same length
and employed worldwide.
of time?
A successful taper results from good judg-
ment and careful planning. The taper should be Should all swimmers perform the same
planned carefully for each swimmer. It’s rare preparation items, irrespective of the events
for a swimmer to taper in exactly the same way in which they will compete?
every time. Variations in the taper arise from Should there be a difference between the
different factors that have acted on the swim- taper for a swimmer who is competing only
mer during the period preceding an important on the fourth day of a meet and, for example,
meet, several of which must be considered on one who is competing on the first day and
every occasion. Planning an effective taper re- probably on other days, too?
quires the coach to have technical skill and
What is the swimmer’s capacity for recovery
acute insight into the state of individual swim-
from hard work?
mers, particularly their reaction to
What allowances should be made for indi-
precompetition anxiety.
vidual temperament?
The taper should be relevant to the work
done in the preceding months. Its duration and Has enough time been built into a tapering
the amount of rest it provides should allow period to counter any possible errors of judg-
complete recovery from accumulated fatigue. ment?

--- Page 162 Text ---
Principles of Modern Training 147
None of these questions is purely hypotheti- 7. Swimmers who have done only a mod-
cal. On the contrary, they enter into nearly erate amount of work through the season often
every planning of a taper period. They consti- will not show great improvement when ta-
tute only a few examples of possible circum- pered because they lack the background train-
stances that may arise. Experience teaches a ing.
coach that these circumstances appear to be 8. Seasonal goals should be established at
unlimited. the start of the training program when the
coach first meets the swimmers. At this time,
General Guidelines on Tapering the coach should identify and outline to the
swimmers the type of work and the duration of
What worked last season may not work as
each training cycle necessary to achieve these
well—or at all—this season. Any number of
goals. Early on, the coach should decide which
changes in conditions can cause this, including
meets the swimmer will enter and the level of
alterations in the annual program of competi-
importance to be accorded each competition.
tive events, the available time for workouts,
More important meets require more complete
absenteeism, conditioning emphasis, swim-
tapers (major taper).
mers’ levels of development, temperament, and
The importance of the meet and the stage of
many other factors. Although a coach may
the season determines whether to use major,
recognize recurring situations, it is wise to be
minor, or mini tapers. A meet may be used to
alert for new sets of circumstances likely to
check the progress of the team as a whole
influence tapering decisions.
toward its established goals or to provide op-
Before I identify situations that need special
portunities for individual members. In particu-
attention in making tapering decisions, it may
lar, the coach may decide to rest a swimmer
be helpful to provide a few general guidelines.
who lacks confidence so that he or she can
record a morale-boosting fast time. It is some-
1. The shorter the race, the longer the taper;
times necessary for an up-and-coming young-
conversely, the longer the race, the shorter the
ster to record a fast swim to encourage contin-
taper. Distance swimmers and sprinters need
ued dedication to a demanding program of
different tapers.
hard work.
2. The more races to be contested, the
9. An ideal psychological climate should
shorter the taper.
be nurtured and every effort made to foster a
3. The younger the swimmer, the shorter
positive team spirit. Physiological and psycho-
the taper. Younger swimmers have a higher
logical preparation should keep pace with each
level of vital energy; moreover, they tend to
other throughout the season and into the taper-
lose the feel of the water quickly if they taper
ing period, resulting in a well-conditioned ath-
too soon. Conversely, an older swimmer may
lete with a strong, positive mental attitude.
need a longer taper. Swimmers who have com-
10. An ideal taper, from the physiological
peted for many years appear to need a longer
standpoint, is when a swimmer has had just the
taper with each successive season.
right amount of rest. Sometimes a swimmer
4. Nervous athletes need a shorter taper. appears unaffected by the taper and shows no
5. Large, well-muscled athletes generally improvement in speed. There’s not much to do
need a longer taper. in this situation but be patient and wait for the
taper to take effect.
6. Swimmers with an adequate back-
ground of hard work usually obtain good re- It is just as possible to have too much rest as
sults if tapered fairly early. Those who have to have too little. Usually, a swimmer who has
been overstressed in training show dramatic had too much rest lacks the conditioning to
adaptation and recovery from accumulative finish a race strongly; conversely, the swimmer
fatigue after a long, well-planned taper. who has had too little rest may not have sharp

--- Page 163 Text ---
148 Breakthrough Swimming
speed initially but may still be able to finish a tinue to overcompensate at the same high level
race strongly. If competing in a three- to four- even though the unusual stress of the hard
day meet, for example, the underrested swim- training period has suddenly been removed. If
mer may improve over the subsequent days as the taper is well planned, a superior perfor-
a result of having more rest. The outlook for the mance results.
overrested and underworked swimmer will
not be as optimistic, however, as there obvi- The Warm-Up
ously would be insufficient time to become
conditioned. Here is a list of the benefits of warming up:
• The resultant increase in body tempera-
Preparing a Basic Plan
ture and pulse rate, combined with dila-
for the Taper
tion of blood vessels in the muscles, takes
the body from its resting state to the
A basic plan for the tapering period should be
physiological level needed for the com-
mapped out at the beginning of the season
petitive event.
when the number of training days and compe-
titions leading to the major meets first become • It loosens the muscles and increases flex-
known. The plan should include an outline of ibility.
each phase of the season together with the • It familiarizes the swimmer with the
duration of each training cycle, as well as ad- pool conditions in which the competi-
equate time for the tapering period. tion takes place.
Nearly all coaches agree that tapering is a
• The swimmer gets into stroke rhythm
complex phase of the season—in fact, the word
and feels out the required pace of the
“complex” seems most readily to spring to
race.
mind in any frank discussion of the topic. The
• Muscle fatigue occurs later in the race
challenge, then, is for the coach to ensure clear
after adequate warm-up.
communication on all the important aspects
of the planned taper with individual swim- • A muscle that is warmed and stretched
mers and the team as a whole. Team meetings prior to maximum exertion is less likely
and clearly drawn charts help explain the to sustain injury.
tapering plan to swimmers at all levels. Not • The warm-up induces a sense of well-
least of all, the coach should warn the swim- being.
mers about overeating and becoming over-
During the workouts of the hard training
weight as a result of the reduced energy de-
season, a swimmer should cultivate a sense for
mands placed on the body. The importance of
how much swimming is sufficient for warm-
early bedtimes and adequate sleep should
up. This sense significantly aids a swimmer in
also be stressed.
tapering and warming up before meets.
Super-Adaptation In some teams, the amount of swimming
needed to warm up in daily training sessions is
At some stages of the season, many swimmers the amount of swimming used in each session
work so hard that they are unable to approach during the taper period. The swimmer does
their best times in training or competition be- just enough work to be able to swim at pace.
fore they taper for the season’s most important This is usually followed by some short, sharp
meets. Counsilman (1968) calls this phase of work, a loosen-down swim, and practice in
training “the valley of fatigue” and considers it starts and turns.
necessary for what he terms super-adaptation. Warm-up procedures vary according to a
The reasoning behind its use is that when the swimmer’s racing events. Short-distance swim-
workload is finally reduced in the taper pe- mers and sprinters include some short speed
riod, the body’s adaptive mechanisms con- work—mostly 25-meter and 50-meter efforts—

--- Page 164 Text ---
Principles of Modern Training 149
whereas distance swimmers establish their race Superficial light massage affects only the
pace by covering a few 100-meter sections. skin circulation, specifically, the skin capillar-
The warm-up should last 20 to 45 minutes, ies, superficial veins, and lymphatics. The first
and the swimmer should be out of the water at two, however, hold so much blood that mas-
least 20 minutes before the meet starts. A swim- sage in the direction of their flow materially
mer preparing for morning competition may increases the return of blood to the heart and
need more warm-up time to wake up. In the produces an effect rather like exercise without
evenings, before swimming in the finals, a the more exhausting effects of fatigue. Because
shorter warm-up is usually enough because of the superficial veins draw blood from the
the swimming done earlier in the day. muscles as well as the skin, the muscles of the
After warming up, a swimmer should don massaged area will drain somewhat. Massage
warm, dry clothing, gloves, socks, and shoes. of the lymphatics increases the flow of lymph
The swimmer should stand up and become and removal of tissue fluid, the accumulation
active just before the race starts by walking of which causes pain and stiffness. In injury,
around and doing mild stretching exercises. this fluid contains an abnormally large amount
As the season progresses, each swimmer of protein, and if it is allowed to remain station-
should determine his or her best basic warm- ary it may be converted into fibrous tissue and
up. Every competitive session should be pre- cause permanent stiffness. Merely rubbing the
ceded by a warm-up and followed by a loosen- skin also sends a vast number of beneficial
down; this helps eliminate stiff or sore impulses into the nervous system.
shoulders, hips, knees, and ankles. Deeper massage hastens circulation through
the muscles and the soft tissues because each
Effects of Massage compression tends to drive the blood toward
the veins where the pressure is least. Similarly,
A benefit of massage is its effect on the circula- deep massage facilitates the dispersal of accu-
tion of the area treated. By improving the circu- mulated lymph or blood in the deeper parts. It
lation of blood and lymph, it facilitates the cannot be overemphasized, however, that loos-
removal of deleterious substances formed in ening movements, either on land or in the
excess by injury or liberated by movement. water, best stimulate the circulation.

--- Page 166 Text ---
Chapter 9
Physiological
Research and
Applications
David Pyne, PhD
Sports Physiologist,
Australian Institute of Sport
In high-level competitive swim-
ming, coaches and swimmers need
to understand the energy demands
involved in successful performance.
The same requirements hold true in
learning the neuromuscular pat-
terns involved in performing effi-
cient stroke mechanics. When prop-
erly mastered, muscles contract,
extend, or remain static in length in
perfect sequence, even when swim-
ming at high speed.
These processes require the inte-
gration of neural signals from the
cerebral motor cortex (nervous sys-
tem) to the muscles. In turn, a chain
of biochemical reactions within the
muscle transforms potential chemi-
cal energy to mechanical energy for
use in the working muscles. The
improved level of fitness that train-
ing provides enhances the body’s
ability to perform more work with
less fatigue.
151

--- Page 167 Text ---
152 Breakthrough Swimming
About Dr. David Pyne
Dr. David Pyne holds a PhD in biochemistry and molecular biology from the Australian
National University, Canberra, and was awarded the Australian Sports Medal in 2000 for his
contribution to swimming in Australia. Since 1987, Dr. Pyne has worked as a sports
physiologist at the Australian Institute of Sport (AIS), specializing in swimming. Dr. Pyne
works with both the AIS swimming team and the Australian national team and was the
physiologist to the 2000 Australian Olympic swimming team. Dr. Pyne travels extensively
with the AIS and Australian teams to national- and international-level competitions and
training camps. His research interests include the applied physiology of swimming;
exercise, training, and immune system research; and environmental physiology. Dr. Pyne is
the secretary to the Australian Swimming Sports Science Advisory Group and writes
coaching/scientific articles for Swimming in Australia, other coaching publications, and
scientific journals.
Energy Metabolism sources within the muscle. The additional
sources of energy are derived from the dietary
Energy metabolism is based on the relation intake of carbohydrate, fat, and protein.
between fuel availability and its use. These fuel A fundamental principle of energy metabo-
sources rely, in turn, on the contribution of lism is that all three energy systems are active
different energy systems to the activities in- throughout exercise. Their relative contribu-
volved. tion in swimming is determined by the dura-
There are four basic energy compounds. The tion and intensity of the event. Short explosive
primary energy compound is adenosine tri- sprints such as the 50-meter events are pre-
phosphate (ATP). The three secondary energy dominantly anaerobic in nature. Middle-dis-
compounds are creatine phosphate (CP), gly- tance events (100 to 400 meters) require a com-
cogen (carbohydrate), and fat. ATP is the cur- bination of anaerobic and aerobic energy.
rency (energy) that powers all cellular func- Long-distance events such as the 800 and 1,500
tions, including muscular contraction. meters and open-water swimming are predomi-
However, there is only sufficient ATP in muscle nantly aerobic in nature.
to sustain a short burst (a few seconds) of Table 9.1 shows the relative contribution of
muscular effort. Even in the 50-meter freestyle, the three energy systems to various swimming
the shortest competitive swimming event, ATP events. Modern swimming training should in-
must be constantly replenished from other clude a full range of training speeds. The need
Table 9.1 Estimated Contribution of Energy Systems to Different
Swimming Events
Event ATP-CP (%) Anaerobic glycolysis (%) Aerobic (%)
50 m 55 40 5
100 m 15 50 35
200 m 10 30 60
400 m 5 25 70
1,500 m 0 15 85

--- Page 168 Text ---
Physiological Research and Applications 153
to combine different speeds with the different speeds but are magnified at slower speeds,
strokes (freestyle, backstroke, butterfly, breast- thus enabling earlier detection.
stroke) provides great opportunities for the
innovative coach. The challenge for the coach Basic Training Principles
and swimmer in the 100-meter, 200-meter, and
Applied to Swimming
400-meter events is to blend endurance and
speed in ideal proportions to produce a win-
Several basic training principles can be applied
ning performance.
to the preparation of competitive swimmers.
These have evolved over time from the hard-
Endurance Training
earned practical experience of coaches and
swimmers alike, as well as from the results of
Two questions are often posed:
scientific investigation. Careful application of
1. If the majority of competitive swimming these principles is a key step in preparing an
events are primarily power based, why effective training program. The details of train-
is training largely endurance based? ing programs vary significantly according to
2. Do swimmers need high-mileage train- the age, skill level, and training history of swim-
ing, and does this violate the principle of mers and the availability of facilities and equip-
specificity of training? ment. Figure 9.1 shows a hierarchy of training
adaptations.
Several factors support a traditional high-
mileage training program. First, the duration Specificity
of most events, from the 100 meter to the 1,500
meter (50 seconds to 16 minutes), has a sub- The principle of specificity states that the maxi-
stantial aerobic requirement. Low-volume, mum benefit of training is obtained by replica-
high-intensity training has its proponents, but tion of the movement patterns and energetic
most coaches recognize that endurance fitness demands of swimming. Specificity of move-
is needed to maximize anaerobic and speed ment patterns is a key aspect of swimming, and
development. training drills and sets should include each of
A swimmer’s buoyancy permits a greater the four major swimming strokes (freestyle,
training volume than weight-bearing exercise butterfly, backstroke, and breaststroke).
such as running. Endurance training facilitates The development of efficient technique at
stroke correction by constant repetition of a different speeds is the foundation of all high-
greater number of movements, whereas sprint level training programs. In practice, freestyle
swimming may serve merely to perpetuate and backstroke constitute the major propor-
faults. Stroke faults are often hidden at high tion of training for swimmers of all strokes.
Anaerobic Weeks
Aerobic Months
Strength Years
Skill Decades
System Time for development
and detraining
Figure 9.1 Hierarchy of training adaptations. From Counsilman and Counsilman 1991.

--- Page 169 Text ---
154 Breakthrough Swimming
Butterfly swimmers in particular complete only ever, the increasing fragmentation of the inter-
a small proportion of training using their main national swimming calendar has resulted in a
stroke. Medley swimmers need to train all the greater focus on shorter macro- and microcycles
different strokes, both in isolation and combi- to prepare swimmers (especially sprint swim-
nation with IM switching sets. mers) for several long-course (50-meter) and
short- course (25-meter) competitions each year.
Overload
Individuality
The principle of progressive overload is based
on a process of stimulus, response, and adapta- Swimmers and coaches should recognize that
tion (Bompa 1983). the principle of individuality is one of the most
A combined pool and dry-land training pro- important aspects of training. Tolerance of train-
gram provides the stimulus to various physi- ing loads, the rate of recovery from high-inten-
ological systems (i.e., cardiovascular, muscu- sity training and competition, preferences in
lar, skeletal, nervous, and hormonal systems). pool and dry-land training, and the need for
A swimmer’s short-term response to training is rest and recovery vary from swimmer to swim-
seen in the daily cycling of fatigue and recov- mer. Most coaches appreciate the need to orga-
ery, but several weeks of a gradually increased nize their training squads by age, ability, and
training workload are required for significant event and within those groups, to individual-
adaptations to occur. ize training where appropriate. Training loads
Adaptation to the judiciously applied stress can be modified in terms of the number of
of training is evident in improvements in car- sessions completed each week, the length (vol-
diovascular fitness, lean muscle mass, muscle ume) of training sessions and sets, and the
composition and function, and the hormonal intensity of different intervals.
and nervous systems. The extent of improve-
ment is influenced by individual genetic limits, Reversibility
specificity of physiological responses, accumu-
The principle of reversibility, or detraining,
lated fatigue, and the nature of the training
suggests that skill and strength require the
stimulus itself.
longest time to develop (years) and aerobic and
Periodization anaerobic fitness the shortest time to develop
(weeks and months). The principle is elegantly
Periodization involves division of the annual illustrated in Counsilman’s Hierarchy of Train-
training plan into smaller, more manageable ing Adaptations (Counsilman and Counsilman
parts. A mesocycle normally covers the entire 1991; see figure 9.1). The rate of detraining
summer or winter season plan. A macrocycle largely mirrors the rate of training improve-
refers to specific three- or four-week training ments, with fitness starting to decline within a
phases or blocks with different emphases. few weeks of detraining (Coyle, Hemmert, and
Macrocycles can take the form of general or Coggan 1986).
specific preparation, taper, competition, or re- The loss of competitive fitness relates to
covery. A microcycle refers to the standard changes in cardiorespiratory, metabolic and
seven-day training week (Monday to Sunday) biochemical parameters, and neuromuscular
that forms the basis of most swimming pro- control. Studies of elite athletes show that fit-
grams. ness can be maintained on 30 to 50 percent of
In the 1970s and 1980s, training for previous training levels for several weeks. This
international-level swimmers was generally has implications for taper and when returning
based on single or two-peak annual cycles. from illness and injury. Swimmers and coaches
Swimmers were prepared for their national should be encouraged that short breaks in train-
championships and the major international ing do not necessarily cause a reduction in
competitions (e.g., Olympic Games, World fitness, and in some cases the reduction in
Championships) in each calendar year. How- residual fatigue actually enhances performance.

--- Page 170 Text ---
Physiological Research and Applications 155
Evolution of ized in the coming decades. Greater recogni-
tion is also being given to the importance of
Interval Training Programs
race pace training (Anderson 1999).
What combination of training volume and in-
tensity is necessary for competitive success? Physiological
The evolution of modern swimming training
and Biomechanical Testing
methodology has been largely based on the
of Swimmers
periodization of training volume and intensity.
Despite general acceptance by coaches for an
Testing of swimmers can be broken down into
organized and systematic approach to train-
two primary categories: training analysis and
ing, no common training theory exists that
competition analysis. Both kinds of evaluation
describes the type, quantity, or pattern of a
are important in preparing, training, and
particular training program that guarantees a
strengthening swimmers.
given result (Steinacker et al. 1998). There are as
Physiological testing is largely directed to-
many training programs as there are swim-
ward assessing the fitness of swimmers. Test-
ming coaches.
ing generally involves measuring physiologi-
In swimming, as in other endurance-based
cal attributes of elite swimmers and the way
cyclic or repetitive sports (e.g., running, cy-
training affects performance. There are several
cling, rowing), the consensus among most
reasons to undertake fitness testing in highly
coaches is that training and performance are
trained swimmers. Testing helps to
related by a dose-response relationship (Banis-
ter, Morton, and Clarke 1997). Improvements
• monitor progress in fitness levels (adap-
in swimming performance are achieved ini-
tation);
tially through a sequential increase in the vol-
• develop training zones (prescription);
ume and intensity of training.
• assess training responses to different sets
A common trend in world swimming has
and drills (evaluation);
been a gradual shift away from distance events
and training to more sprint-based programs. • identify individual strengths and weak-
This has been fueled by increasing commercial- nesses (evaluation); and
ization of swimming with an upsurge in short- • predict performances (prediction).
course swimming and in the number of com-
petitive events in the calendar. These changes Fitness tests should be relevant to swim-
appear to have had a significant impact on the ming, valid and reliable, and easy to adminis-
type of training programs at two levels. ter. A worldwide trend is to conduct more
The traditional one or two peaks per year has specific pool-based testing rather than general
given way to a more fragmented and congested laboratory testing. Pool-based testing is more
training plan with a greater number of readily acceptable to coaches and swimmers
macrocycles (short two- or three-week training and eliminates the difficulties in transferring
blocks). Second, the design of individual train- results from the laboratory to the pool.
ing sessions also appears to be more fragmented,
with combination-type workouts preferred over Competition Analysis
the older-style simple workouts.
These changes may partly explain the pla- Comprehensive race analysis has been con-
teau and even decline in the standard of dis- ducted at international meets for over a de-
tance swimming, while times in sprint events cade. Competition analysis involves overhead
and short-course swimming continue to im- video filming and computer-based analysis of
prove. Although concerns for traditional train- swimmers during each event. Dr. Bruce Ma-
ing have been expressed for some time son, a biomechanist with the Australian swim-
(Thornton 1987), it is inevitable that interval ming team, has been at the forefront of these
training programs will become further special- developments. With his system, the camera is

--- Page 171 Text ---
156 Breakthrough Swimming
positioned so that all swimmers in a race are The other phases are denoted as free swim-
analyzed for split times, start, turn and finish ming. In the report sheet, these times are also
times, and stroke characteristics such as rate, reported as swimming velocity. The information
length, and efficiency (figure 9.2). provided for the free-swimming phases includes
stroke length in meters, stroke frequency in
strokes per minute, swim velocity in meters per
second, and the derived efficiency index.
Multiplying the stroke frequency in strokes
per second and the stroke length in meters per
stroke provides the swim velocity in meters per
second.
At the base of the spreadsheet, the average
information and total time for each aspect of
the race is provided. During the meet, the com-
petition analysis results for a session are given
to the coaches before the next session begins.
Stroke characteristics are also presented in
graphic form to assist the coach. Access to a
video monitor is often arranged, and a copy of
the tape is given to the coach for subsequent
analysis. Newer video systems overlay the digi-
tal analysis information on top of the video film
of the race.
Monitoring
Swimming Training
Workloads in Practice
Modeling of swimming training in its simplest
form defines training load as the product of
Figure 9.2 Camera setup for competition training volume and intensity. Training vol-
analysis. ume in swimming is relatively easy to quantify.
Multiples of 25-meter and 50-meter laps can be
This process provides a clear and concise easily added to determine the total distance
summary of each swimmer’s performance covered in a single set, session, or training
during the event. The spreadsheet output of week. Most coaches and swimmers are com-
the competition analysis permits a simple fortable with the notion and terminology relat-
(cid:2)
comparison between swimmers in a particular ing, for example, to a 2,000-meter set (e.g., 20
race. Analysis of results over a number of cham- 100 meters), a 6,000-meter session, or a 40-
pionships has revealed that starts, turns, and kilometer week.
finishes are as important as free-swimming High-level training involving planning for
speed in determining the final results (Mason longer periods also necessitates the calculation
and Fowlie 1997). A typical set of competition of training volumes. For example, coaches can
analysis results is shown in table 9.2. plan a two-week training camp (e.g., 160 kilo-
The measurements made are start time (time meters in a 14-day camp), a complete prepara-
from the starting signal to 15 meters), turn time tion or training macrocycle (e.g., 500 kilometers
(time in and out from a distance of 7.5 meters for a 12-week cycle), or a full training year (e.g.,
off the wall), and finish time (time from 5 2,000 kilometers in 46 weeks). Although these
meters from the finishing wall until hand touch). calculations can be time consuming, they are

--- Page 172 Text ---
Physiological Research and Applications 157
Table 9.2 Competition Race Analysis: Typical Results From a Men’s
50-Meter Freestyle Race
Swimmer A Swimmer B Swimmer C
(1st) (2nd) (3rd)
First 25-m lap
Start time 15 m (sec) 5.91 5.77 6.04
Stroke length (m) 2.14 2.14 1.88
Stroke frequency (strokes/m) 58.80 59.70 67.90
Velocity (m/sec) 2.34 2.34 2.33
Index (m (cid:2) m/sec) 5.00 5.00 4.38
25-m split time (sec) 10.68 10.68 10.74
Second 25-m lap
Stroke length (m) 2.14 2.09 1.81
Stroke frequency (strokes/m) 57.50 58.00 66.70
Velocity (m/sec) 2.08 2.02 2.03
Index (m (cid:2) m/sec) 4.45 4.22 3.67
25-m split time (sec) 12.03 12.36 12.33
50-m lap time (sec) 22.71 23.04 23.07
Finish time (sec) 2.30 2.45 2.41
Results (sec) 22.71 23.04 23.07
very instructive during the planning and re- Substantial increases in either training vol-
view processes. ume or intensity during early season to
A central issue in swimming relates to the midseason place considerable physical de-
relative potency (and paradoxically, the rela- mands and stress on the body. In the competi-
tive danger) of substantial increases in training tive phase, some swimmers exhibit fatigue and
volume and intensity. Although high-training poor performance when required to race fre-
volumes and periodic doses of high-intensity quently over a short period.
training are a fundamental part of training, the
problems associated with excessive training Training Intensity
are well known.
Coaching experience and the results of sci- In contrast to training volume, training inten-
entific research collectively suggest that exces- sity is much more difficult to quantify. Coaches
sive training volume and training intensity can must employ a systematic approach for effec-
induce fatigue, overtraining, injury, and ill- tive planning and monitoring of training inten-
ness. Distance swimmers generally require sity. The most common approach involves the
higher training volumes (approximately 20 to use of a training classification system that gives
25 percent higher) to develop the background rise to different training intensities.
necessary for success in events ranging from In the past, most of these training systems
400 to 1,500 meters. have relied on relatively subjective descriptors

--- Page 173 Text ---
158 Breakthrough Swimming
of intensity, which gave rise to a wide range of anaerobic threshold training an IC of 3. Maxi-
terminology (e.g., moderate intensity aerobic, mal oxygen uptake training is intensive and
aerobic threshold, anaerobic threshold, lactate exhausting and consequently has an IC with
tolerance, onset of blood lactate accumulation, the greater weighting of 5. Sprint training, which
maximal alactic anaerobic, etc.) that is difficult can be the most physiologically demanding, is
to quantify and examine objectively (Counsil- given the highest IC of 8. Other training sys-
man and Counsilman 1993). To overcome this tems used in swimming employ a similar sys-
deficiency, various systems have been devised tem of weighting coefficients (Mujika et al.
where different intensities of swimming are 1996).
given a particular weighting or physiological The total training load equals the number of
stress coefficient. This process is based on blood kilometers swum at each training intensity
lactate concentration, which is assumed to re- multiplied by the appropriate training inten-
flect the physiological demands of different sity coefficient. The resulting training load is
exercise intensities. reported in arbitrary units, but these are repro-
The most important feature of these systems ducible and comparable with repeated calcula-
is that the degree of physiological stress expe- tions.
rienced by the swimmer increases exponen-
tially above the level of the anaerobic thresh- Training Load, Monotony,
old. To account for this, greater weighting and Strain
coefficients are given to the higher training
intensity levels. Training load cannot be fully described by train-
Table 9.3 shows a typical system where low- ing volume, training intensity, or a combina-
and moderate-intensity aerobic swimming have tion of the two. There are many subtleties in the
an intensity coefficient (IC) of 1, moderate in- prescription of training, and it is not just a
tensity aerobic development an IC of 2, and simple process of preparing training sets with
Table 9.3 Training Weeks
In training week A, aerobic-based training was completed with a total training load of 98 units. Training week B had
a total load of 103 units.
Week A Week B
Intensity coefficient Volume Load Volume Load
Zone (IC) (km) (IC (cid:2) km) (km) (IC (cid:2) km)
A1 1 27 27 20 20
A2 1 15 15 5 5
A3 2 10 20 5 10
AT 3 5 15 8 24
MVO 5 1 5 4 20
2
SP 8 2 16 3 24
Training load 60 km 98 units 45 km 103 units
A1 = low-intensity aerobic swimming
A2 = moderate-intensity aerobic swimming
A3 = moderate-intensity aerobic development
AT = anaerobic threshold training
MVO = maximal oxygen uptake training
2
SP = sprint training

--- Page 174 Text ---
Physiological Research and Applications 159
differing volumes and intensities. Recent ad- ment. Physical and massage therapists provide
vancements in training (Foster 1998) have fo- support in the areas of injury prevention, treat-
cused on additional descriptors of training ment and rehabilitation, and pre- and postrace
stress, including training load (an average of massage during competition. Dietitians work
the previous six weeks’ training), training mo- with catering staff in the planning and schedul-
notony (daily mean/standard deviation), and ing of meals, conduct individual counseling and
training strain (product of training load and dietary reviews, and provide advice on nutri-
training monotony). Inclusion of these training tional supplements and ergogenic aids.
indices gives the coach up to five variables in Biomechanists conduct extensive filming of
the planning process: volume, intensity, load, swimmer’s skills and technique during training
monotony, and strain. and provide full race analysis during major
Training loads generally increase during a competition. The team physician coordinates
competitive preparation. Loads should be in- medical care for team members involving medi-
creased gradually and combined with suffi- cal screening and examination, treatment and
cient rest and recovery. Short recovery periods management of illness and injury, and educa-
of active or complete rest (24 to 48 hours) are tion, and also oversees compliance to drugs-in-
unlikely to have a significant effect on long- sport regulations.
term fitness. The increasing involvement of sports sci-
Training monotony represents the degree of ence and sports medicine support has been a
variation or fluctuation in training loads over feature of international swimming through the
time. Reducing training monotony is achieved 1990s. Although experimental research in swim-
by varying training volumes. For example, ses- ming is conducted in many countries, direct
sion volumes should range from 3.0 to 9.0 and extensive involvement of scientific staff
kilometers rather than repeating the same vol- with national team programs has been limited
ume (e.g., 4.0 to 6.0 kilometers) session after to a few of the leading swimming nations.
session. Another strategy is to vary the pattern Political and societal changes have seen a de-
of the number of training sessions per day. cline in the domination of swimming by two or
All three derived training indices (training three nations, and the emergence of many
load, monotony, and strain) can be plotted to smaller and former middle-ranking nations
show changes over time. Thresholds can be from all parts of the world. In a fashion similar
established for different swimmers, permitting to the international coaching community, swim-
the coach to tailor training programs to suit ming scientists from many of the different coun-
individual needs. Simple methods of monitor- tries engage in dialogue with their colleagues
ing the characteristics of training can help to to share information and experiences.
minimize fatigue, injury, and illness.
Physiological Testing at the
Support Networks in
Australian Institute of Sport
Sport Science and Medicine
The Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) is one
The national team programs of leading swim- of the major centers for swimming in Austra-
ming nations are using a range of sport science lia and provides approximately one-third of
and sports medicine personnel during training the swimmers for the Australian swimming
and competition. Physiologists administer a range team. Testing of swimmers at the AIS has
of pool- and laboratory-based tests to monitor evolved over 20 years on the basis of practical
changes in fitness through a training season. experience, empirical evidence, and applied
They also assist the coach in planning and re- research.
viewing specific training sessions and programs. The AIS uses several testing protocols to
Psychologists work with individual coaches and assess various components of fitness in inter-
athletes and contribute to overall team manage- national-level swimmers. For reasons of

--- Page 175 Text ---
160 Breakthrough Swimming
(cid:2)
specificity and practicality, their tests are usu- 1999b). The 7 200-meter step test (Pyne, Maw,
ally done in the pool. Physiological testing is and Goldsmith 2000) is useful in monitoring
done throughout the year but is concentrated changes in discrete aspects of endurance fit-
primarily during the preparation for the major ness during a season (figure 9.3).
championships in each calendar year. In nor- Physiological details obtained during
mal circumstances, there are two competitive submaximal and maximal testing provide criti-
cycles each year for international-level Austra- cal information for the coach to determine
lian swimmers. Training through the Austra- training loads and monitor performance im-
lian summer (November to March) prepares provements with training (Pyne, Maw, and
swimmers for the national championships held Goldsmith 2000). Routine blood lactate and
in March or April each year. The winter season heart rate testing is conducted on demand to
(May to August) prepares swimmers for the assess the responses to various training sets,
major international swimming championships particularly in the final few weeks of a prepa-
usually conducted in July and August (sum- ration. Body composition measures include
mer in the Northern Hemisphere). The testing standing height, body mass, and sum of
dates are made in conjunction with the coach- skinfolds, and a derived body mass to sum of
ing staff and follow the competition schedule skinfolds ratio (figure 9.4).
and training program. Blood testing is done during medical screen-
Testing at the AIS has focused on three areas: ing and to assess the impact of training and
pool-based assessment of aerobic and anaero- dietary interventions. Saliva testing is used to
bic fitness, measurement of body composition, assess a swimmer’s risk of upper respiratory
and routine blood and saliva testing (Pyne illness during training (Gleeson et al. 1999).
Heart rate (bpm)
220
200
180
160
140
June 1, 1999
Aug. 10, 1999
120
Nov. 11, 1999
Feb. 15, 2000
100
78 74 70 66 62 58 54
Time per 100 m
Figure 9.3 Typical result showing heart rate-velocity curves derived from the 7 (cid:2) 200-meter step test.

--- Page 176 Text ---
Physiological Research and Applications 161
1.20 MAOD) can be made. The results of testing
generally show that elite swimmers have larger
1.10
anaerobic and aerobic capacities than moder-
ately trained swimmers.
1.00
A recent study of the energetics of swim-
0.90 ming confirms the long-held belief that at com-
petition speeds, freestyle is the most economic
0.80
stroke, with the technical limitations of breast-
stroke and butterfly increasing the energy cost
0.70
of those strokes (Capelli, Pendergast, and
0.60 Termin 1998).
0.50
Overtraining and Fatigue
6 6 7 7 6 7 7 8 8 8 9 9 9 0
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2
A pril
11,
N o v.
2
6,
F e b.
1
2,
M ar.
2
0,
J u n e
2
3,
A u g.
1
8,
N o
v.
3,
M
ar.
5,
A pril
1
6,
A u g.
2
0,
F e b.
1
8,
J u n e
2
4,
O
ct.
4,
J a n.
2
4, A
ce d
p
e
ro
w
lo
i
n
th
g e
r
d
es
s
t
t
a
a
n
te
d
o
r
f
e c
fa
o
t
v
ig
er
u
y
e
c
t
a
h
n
a t
l e
d
a
o
d
e s
t o
n o
o
t
v e
re
r
-
-
training, which is typically characterized by
Figure 9.4 Coefficient of body composition
poor training and racing. A distinction needs to
(calculated as the ratio of body mass in kilograms/
be made between overreaching and overtrain-
sum of skinfolds in millimeters) in a male swimmer
ing (Keast and Morton 1992).
over a four-year period. The trend line is a fitted
Overreaching refers to the normal daily fa-
polynomial curve showing the long-term trends in
tigue that is a fundamental part of high-level
body composition.
swimming training. Swimmers should be en-
couraged to see fatigue as a feature of training
Physiological Research to be respected and not necessarily feared.
Overtraining refers to poor training and racing
in International Swimming
over an extended period of time that doesn’t, at
least initially, respond to rest and recovery.
International physiological research regarding
Careful management of training loads and suf-
swimming focuses on many areas, but two of
ficient rest and recovery maximize the benefits
the most important are metabolism and over-
obtained from training and minimize the risk
training and fatigue.
of overtraining.
Metabolism Indicators of overreaching and overtraining
include poor performance, recurrent illness,
One of the enduring lines of research in swim- injury, elevated heart rate, muscle soreness
ming is determining the metabolic require- during recovery, acute localized fatigue during
ments of different swimming events and how exercise, faster onset of fatigue, and higher
this information can be used in training (Lavoie ratings of perceived exertion (Rowbottom,
and Montpetit 1986). Metabolic measurements Keast, and Morton 1998).
of oxygen uptake often prove difficult in swim- Physiological parameters that have been
ming. The mouthpiece and ventilation mask studied as possible markers of overtraining
worn by the swimmer can be uncomfortable include resting and postexercise heart rate and
and may affect the ability of the athlete to blood pressure; resting and exercise oxygen
perform optimally and with maximal efficiency. consumption; and blood levels of proteins, en-
Several research groups in Europe and North zymes, and hormones. Despite a large amount
America have conducted extensive research of research, the results of these tests have proved
into the metabolism of highly trained swim- inconsistent. Self-reported ratings of well-be-
mers (Lavoie and Montpetit 1986; Troup 1999). ing may provide a better means of monitoring
Estimates of aerobic capacity (maximal oxygen overtraining and recovery in highly trained
·
uptake or VO max) and anaerobic capacity swimmers (Hooper et al. 1995). The system
2
(maximal accumulated oxygen deficit or requires swimmers to record subjective ratings

--- Page 177 Text ---
162 Breakthrough Swimming
of quality of sleep, fatigue, stress, and muscle A typical 21-day altitude training program is
soreness on a scale of 1 to 7, from very, very low, normally divided into three phases: an initial
or good (point 1) to very, very high, or bad acclimatization phase (days 1 through 3), the
(point 7). main training phases (days 4 through 18), and
Fatigue and recovery occur more quickly in a final recovery phase (days 19 through 21). The
simple tasks such as swimming. Drills and main training phase can consist of up to four
activities with higher skill levels tend to cause microcycles, each three to four days in duration
fatigue more slowly. The nature of the recovery (figure 9.5). Within each day, swimmers can
activity influences its effectiveness, and this is train up to three times in the pool with supple-
best illustrated by the widespread practice of mentary dry-land training.
active recovery (low- to moderate-intensity Training volumes can reach 16 kilometers
swimming) during training sessions and after per day, with a total of 140 to 210 kilometers
racing. over a three-week camp for sprint and distance
Other recovery strategies include rest; the swimmers. Training of this type elicited mod-
use of flotation devices and equipment, such as est but significant improvements in Australian
the pull buoy and kickboard; fluid replacement national team swimmers in their 200-meter
and dietary considerations; remedial massage; maximal swimming time at altitude and on
and alternating hot and cold water treatments return to sea level (Pyne 1998).
using a spa, shower, or bath. Training volume The timing of competition after altitude train-
and intensity should be managed carefully. ing is widely debated. On return to sea level,
most swimmers would compete within 10 to 28
Altitude Training days after altitude. Experienced coaches have a
preferred altitude-competition schedule, al-
Should coaches use altitude training to prepare though these are generally based on opinion
their swimmers for competition? Swimmers rather than objective experimental data. Con-
from many nations have trained at altitude siderable individual variation exists among
(1,300 to 2,500 meters) for varying lengths of athletes in their response to altitude training;
time to prepare for competition at altitude or, this is partly related to the adequacy of iron
more commonly, to accelerate the normal rate stores (Chapman, Stray-Gundersen, and Levine
of physiological adaptation that occurs at sea 1998).
level.
Illness and Immunity
Despite its relative popularity, the scientific
community is still largely divided on whether in Swimmers
significant physiological and performance ben-
efits are obtained (Stray-Gundersen and Levine Many swimmers and coaches have expressed
1999). However, a number of coaches and swim- concern that high-level training leads to in-
mers report substantial improvements in per- creased risk of illness and infection. Despite the
formance after altitude training and continue interest in the area and many experimental
to use this form of preparation. studies, it remains unclear if the immune sys-
High-altitude exposure imposes significant tem and overall health are significantly com-
physiological stress on the human body, and promised by high-level training.
care needs to be exercised when training at race Critical assessment of the relevant studies
pace. Much of the knowledge of altitude train- shows that the incidence of illness is only likely
ing was accumulated during the 1970s and to be increased in two specific groups of ath-
1980s after the Mexico City Olympic Games in letes. Swimmers undertaking longer competi-
1968. Many of the leading swimming nations tive events (distance and open-water swim-
(including the United States, China, Germany, mers) or those suffering from the consequences
Australia, Great Britain, Italy, Canada, France, of excessive training volume and intensity
and Japan) have some swimmers using alti- coupled with inadequate recovery may be at
tude training. risk (Pyne and Gleeson 1998).

--- Page 178 Text ---
2 1 S u n. 2 Off 4. 0 3. 0 7. 0 2 5. 0 2 0 0. 0 o n al
-
e t e r
s.
1 9 2 0 Fri. S at. Fi n al Mi c r o c y cl e 6 2 2 5. 0 Off 5. 0 Off 4. 0 4. 0 9. 0 9. 0 Mi cr o c y cl e 6 b y i n t e r n a
ti
s 2 0 0 kil o
m
n e i
1 8 T h u. a k e u m
r
tol
1 7 W e d. 2 5. 0 4. 0 Off 9. 0 3 5. 0 1 7 5. 0 u n d e o t al v
1 4
1 5 1 6
S u n.
M o n. T u e. Tr ai ni n g I V Mi c r o c y cl e 5
2
3 3
5. 0
5. 0 5. 0
6. 0
5. 0 5. 0 3. 0 3. 0
Off 1 1. 0
1 3. 0 1 3. 0
4 0. 0
Mi cr o c y cl e 5
1 4 0. 0 ai ni n
g p r o g r a m
e r e s t
d a y s. T h e t
1 3 S at. n g III y cl e 4 3 5. 0 7. 0 3. 0 1 5. 0 y cl e 4 u d e t r m pl e t
1 2 Fri. Tr ai ni Mi c r o c 3 5. 0 6. 0 3. 0 1 4. 0 Mi cr o c y al ti t e e c o
ar
1 1 h u. 1 - d h t h
1 0 W e d.
T
2 5. 0 6. 0 Off 1 1. 0 4 0. 0 1 0 0. 0 y pi c al
2
cl e s,
wi t
8 9 M o n. T u e. Tr ai ni n g II Mi c r o c y cl e 3 3 3 5. 0 5. 0 6. 0 7. 0 3. 0 3. 0 1 4. 0 1 5. 0 Mi cr o c y cl e 3 c t u r e o f a t a y mi c r o c y
ud
7
S
u n. 2 5. 0 5. 0 Off
1
0. 0
3
5. 0
6
0. 0
e
s t r
x
3 -
6 S at. ni n g I c y cl e 2 3 4. 0 5. 0 3. 0 1 2. 0 c y cl e 2 wi n g t
h
d i n t o
si
5 Fri. Tr ai Mi c r o 3 5. 0 5. 0 3. 0 1 3. 0 Mi cr o s h o vi d e
m di
u.
as
4 T h g r m i
3 W e d. 2 4. 0 Off 5. 0 9. 0 2 5. 0 2 5. 0 ti c di a r o g r a
1 2 M o n. T u e. I niti al Mi c r o c y cl e 1 2 2 3. 0 Off 4. 0 Off 4. 0 5. 0 7. 0 9. 0 Mi cr o c y cl e 1 T ot al ( k m) S c h e m a m e r s. T h e p
5
m
D a y S e s si o n s V ol u m e A. M. V ol u m e N o o n V ol u m e P. M. T ot al g u r e
9.
v el s wi
Fie
l
163

--- Page 179 Text ---
164 Breakthrough Swimming
A recent study in Australia showed that suffering respiratory illness during the final
highly trained swimmers have no more illness few weeks before competition are likely to
than sedentary or moderately trained age- and experience a decrement in performance (Pyne
sex-matched individuals (table 9.4). The swim- et al. 2001).
mers had an average of 2.9 upper respiratory Coaches are responsible for training loads,
tract illnesses (e.g., common cold), which com- which directly influence immune function.
pared favorably with the general population Moderate-intensity training can boost immu-
mean of 3.0 illnesses per year (Fricker et al. nity, but high-intensity training can cause tem-
2000). porary suppression of immunity in some swim-
Management of swimmers with a history of mers. Team management members are
illness is based on maintaining a healthy im- responsible for the provision of suitable accom-
mune system and minimizing exposure to in- modation, transportation, and training facili-
fected individuals (Pyne et al. 2000). The im- ties. Medical staff are responsible for screening
mune system is influenced by a wide range of team members and providing medical care and
physical, environmental, psychological, and medication to treat illness. Most important, the
behavioral factors that collectively form the behavioral and self-management skills of swim-
basis of the recommended intervention strate- mers play a significant role in reducing the risk
gies (Pyne et al. 2000). Reducing the risk of of illness. Swimmers should be educated and
illness requires the cooperation of athletes, reminded of the importance of hygiene, ad-
coaches, and team staff (table 9.5). Swimmers equate sleep, diet, and other lifestyle factors.
Table 9.4 Incidence of Upper Respiratory and Gastrointestinal Illness
in 97 Swimming Scholarship Holders at the Australian Institute
of Sport (1988–1998)
Average age % URI/year % of four or % GITI/year
Group (range) (range) more URI/year (range)
Male (n = 56) 19 (16–25) 2.5 (0–8) 15 0.4 (0–2)
Female (n = 41) 17 (14–33) 3.1 (0–10) 22 0.7 (0–3)
URI = upper respiratory illness
GITI = gastrointestinal tract illness
Table 9.5 Strategies to Limit the Risk of Illness in Highly Trained Swimmers
Strategy Recommendations
Training Carefully manage training volume and intensity, and make provision for adequate rest
and recovery periods.
Environmental Limit initial exposure when training or competing in adverse environmental conditions
(heat, humidity, altitude, air pollution, etc.).
Psychological Teach swimmers self-management and coping skills. Monitor swimmers’ responses to
individual and team stresses of high-level training and competition.
Behavioral Adopt a well-balanced diet with adequate intake of macro- and micronutrients. Limit
transmission of contagious illnesses by reducing exposure to common infections,
airborne pathogens, and physical contact with infected individuals.
Clinical Liaise with team or family doctor. Organize medical screening prior to travel or major
competition. Check immunization and vaccination schedules.

--- Page 180 Text ---
Physiological Research and Applications 165
Practical Guidelines • include some nonspecific cross training
to offset staleness; and
and Recommendations
• include sufficient rest and recovery.
Application of training principles, experience,
and the results of scientific investigation give Science and Swimming:
rise to several practical suggestions to maxi-
Future Directions
mize the benefits from training (Pyne 1999a).
Quality of training should be emphasized over
Research in the sport and exercise sciences
sheer effort. While the need for swimmers to
expands at an ever-increasing rate. In the pe-
tough out their workouts cannot be discounted,
riod from 1950 to the early 1970s, the focus of
it’s preferable for swimmers to reach desired
most scientific work was primarily at the organ
speeds.
and whole-body level. Many studies showed
One-pace training should be limited. Swim-
the importance of cardiorespiratory fitness,
mers should be encouraged to become profi-
body size, flexibility, muscle strength, and
cient through a full range of swimming speeds.
power, illustrating how these attributes could
Sprint swimmers should develop speed on a
be improved through athletic training.
foundation of endurance fitness; middle-
In the 1980s and 1990s, advancements in
distance swimmers need to blend speed and
medical instrumentation and technology
endurance; distance swimmers should focus
shifted focus to examining the effects of exer-
on developing the various aspects of endur-
cise and training at the cellular level (Baldwin
ance fitness. Muscular strength and endurance
2000). This period saw a great deal of interest in
are important for all events and should be
using emerging medical technologies to study
developed in both pool and dry-land training.
muscle and blood. This situation persists to-
Fitness should be maintained throughout the
day, where highly trained swimmers are rou-
year rather than relying on a big preparation
tinely tested for parameters such as heart rate
for major competitions.
and blood lactate.
Individual variability in recovery potential,
The next few decades of the 21st century will
exercise capacity, and tolerance to stress ex-
see application of molecular biology tools in
plains the range of vulnerability among swim-
sports science research (Baldwin 2000). The
mers under similar training regimes. Part of the
new molecular tools center on gene cloning
reason for these differences is that most swim-
and sequencing technology and molecular
mers are able to train with very high loads,
probing to identify different cells and cellular
provided the program includes strategies de-
structures.
vised to control the overall strain and stress.
At present, most attention is directed toward
Swimmers should be encouraged to undertake
solving the medical complexities of heart dis-
intensive training programs in the knowledge
ease, diabetes, obesity, aging, and cancer. Fu-
that variations in performance and fatigue are
ture work in the exercise and sport sciences will
to be expected and are not necessarily prob-
target such issues as identification of geneti-
lems to overcome.
cally gifted athletes, optimization of training
In accordance with these concepts, it is rec-
programs, enhanced injury treatment, and im-
ommended that a swimmer should:
proved detection of fatigue.
Advancements in the different scientific dis-
• start training with a program of low to
ciplines will continue to shape the evolution of
moderate volume and intensity;
swim training and performance. Ultimately,
• employ a gradual periodized increase in
improvements will come from a deeper under-
training volumes and loads;
standing of the primary factors contributing to
• use a variety of training volumes and swim performance. Scientists will continue to
intensities to avoid monotony and stress; work with coaches and swimmers in their quest
• avoid excessive mileage that could lead to improve training and competition perfor-
to exhaustion, illness, or injury; mance.

--- Page 182 Text ---
Chapter 10
Development of a
Training Program
Planning a successful season train-
ing program entails more than de-
signing a series of workouts that
bring a team to peak form at the
championship season. A systematic
approach should consider all the
other factors that may influence per-
formance.
These factors include the type of
meets in which the team intends to
compete, the particular league or
conference and the specific events
for which the swimmers need to
prepare, the dates of major competi-
tions, the amount of pool time avail-
able for training, and the training
background of each swimmer on
the team. To provide motivation for
purposeful effort throughout the
season, team as well as individual
goals should be established soon
after the team has gathered to begin
training.
In this chapter, we examine the
methods of developing an effective
training program based on each
swimmer’s characteristics. Each
training method produces specific
effects so the coach must know
which training format will provide
the best results for each swimmer.
For example, a swimmer in a college
program will need to balance train-
ing with academic responsibilities.
Therefore, the most effective train-
ing method that produces maximum
167

--- Page 183 Text ---
168 Breakthrough Swimming
results within the confines of the athlete’s sched- between twice-daily workouts. Quality rest al-
ule should be used. lows for regeneration of the body and adapta-
tion to stress. In fact, rest can be regarded as
The Individual Swimmer unseen training.
A coach should observe each swimmer’s
reactions to training, particularly during the
Because there is no average person, you cannot
most demanding phase of the season, to plan
uniformly apply a single method. What is good
workouts compatible with the individual’s abil-
for one may not be good for another. Albert
ity to tolerate stress. The coach should assess
Einstein, just before he died, said that one of the
the accumulative stress placed on the swimmer
few things that he felt sure about was that the
and use this knowledge to plan the tapering
individual is unique. And the individual
period as carefully as possible.
changes with time—no person is the same per-
son today as last year. We cannot successfully
Individual Capacity for Training
train swimmers with canned, cut-and-dried,
overstandardized methods. A swimmer’s de- It is not understood what makes a great athlete
velopment, or any human development for different from a mediocre one of similar phy-
that matter, can never be an assembly-line or sique; skill, economy of movement, and tenac-
stamping-machine process. ity must all play a part. It is difficult enough to
The coach should know the training history find out how any muscle works—subtle differ-
of every swimmer. This knowledge lets the ences among individuals are still beyond our
coach carefully plan workloads in accordance means. It is thus a mistake for swimmers to
with each swimmer’s capacity. To set a training slavishly copy the training methods of champi-
program that is beyond a swimmer’s ability ons. Many years of conditioning are necessary
invites failure, but a program that is too easy before a swimmer can hope to emulate their
does not offer a realistic challenge. workloads.
Swimmers react differently to the same train- The coach should understand the athlete’s
ing workload, and they have different poten- present state of training; the fitter the athlete,
tials for improvement. Genetic factors set limi- the less improvement that can be expected.
tations, physiological and psychological, on Effective coaching requires that the training
one’s level of achievement. It also appears that overload be applied carefully until the coach
not too much can be done to change tempera- knows how an athlete reacts to stress. Another
ment. A coach may encounter a wide range of reason coaches should study and understand
temperaments among swimmers on a team, individual reactions is that athletes differ in
from unstable neuroticism to the spontaneous their reactions to stress and to training formats.
cheerfulness that is so often characteristic of the The constitutional limitations of the indi-
physiologically robust. vidual constrain the rate of improvement and
A coach can usually expect different re- the amount of training that can be absorbed. A
sponses from athletes at various levels of matu- coach who knows the maximal capacity of an
rity, especially in their reactions to stress and athlete can carefully plan the intensity and
their abilities to handle the training workload. duration of the training effort. If the athlete
The coach should recognize and respect these does not appear to be adapting to the training
differences and avoid treating younger ath- workload after about two weeks, the coach
letes as miniature adults. should reassess the type of stress placed on the
The importance of good nutrition as a major athlete. Although physiological monitoring—
factor in performance should not be overlooked. particularly blood lactate measurement—may
And for athletes to maintain improvement indicate a swimmer’s reaction to training, most
within a regimen of hard training, adequate teams lack ready access to facilities for it.
rest is a prime essential. Many athletes, trying Counsilman’s three basic tests for assessing a
to keep pace in modern urban society, tend to swimmer’s progress are easily applied, how-
neglect the importance of rest, at night and ever, and provide an effective measure, espe-

--- Page 184 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 169
cially in that the results can be readily com- pity is that youngsters seldom learn to enjoy
pared with a swimmer’s previous workouts and fully appreciate the subtle challenges of
using the same repeat sets (Counsilman 1968). the sport. Many young swimmers do not flour-
Counsilman’s three tests are the average time ish as they should because they are in a pro-
for a set of repeat swims; the pulse rate after gram with little if any instruction in stroke
exercise; and the swimmer’s stroke rate counted techniques or the whys and wherefores of train-
on the last length of every second, third, or ing, paces, strategies, and so on.
fourth repeat swim. The first pitfall for a coach is thus the stan-
dardized workout in which an entire group is
The Individual Swimmer
subjected to the same schedule. The standard-
in the Team Setting
ization of workouts has become traditional in
many teams at all levels, from local to interna-
Should practices be scheduled for the team or
tional. The coach walks on deck and writes the
for its individual members? This simple ques-
workout on the board for the whole team.
tion may elicit further questions that touch on
Nevertheless, the idea that what is good for the
the training policies of different teams and on
champions is good for everyone is not neces-
important aspects of the philosophy of swim-
sarily true.
ming. Non-state controlled programs have
tended to skirt this important issue. The large
size of many teams, often an economic neces- Training Formats
sity, and the consequent wide range of indi-
vidual ability often present a formidable chal- Although the formats of most top-level train-
lenge to the coaching staff. ing programs often have a distinct similarity,
It is important to remember that competitive differences in planning arise from the specific
swimming is ultimately an individual sport. requirements of each team. Other modifica-
Particularly at the higher levels of competition tions may occur as a coach tries out new ideas.
where really talented athletes are involved, it Many considerations affect the design of a
has become absolutely necessary to know a training program. For example, when coaching
great deal about the individual athlete to fully college athletes an effort must be made to help
develop that person’s potential. We need to them effectively balance their available time
know more about each swimmer and to sched- between academic obligations and the demands
ule training along individual lines, yet this of training. Older athletes have no time to
does not happen in most teams. Although many waste on training items of doubtful value. It is
coaches think this is their approach, close scru- especially important that each of their work-
tiny often reveals it is not. outs be as specific as possible with no extrane-
In fact, most schedules take form either ous items.
around the requirements of a few champion A well-planned conditioning program
athletes or, at the other extreme, where a team should enable a swimmer gradually to im-
has no outstanding swimmers, around the av- prove the physiological qualities necessary to
erage needs of the group, which is at best a produce peak performances in the season’s
shotgun method. major meets. Effective training consists of cycles
During the development of the novice com- of varied activity, each aimed at a specific pur-
petitor, the shotgun method may produce im- pose.
provement for a while. But regardless of a
swimmer’s level of maturity, it will not pro- Weight Training
duce the best possible results; rather, it creates
swimmers cast in the same mold with little Weight training is done for a half hour every
regard for their individuality. day for the first 8 to 12 weeks of the season.
In this type of program, it is common to hear Later in the season the frequency is reduced to
much about the success of a few outstanding three days a week. Some type of weight train-
swimmers but little about those who fail. The ing should continue to within 14 days of the

--- Page 185 Text ---
170 Breakthrough Swimming
national championships or whatever major do pulling drills with their feet immobilized in
meet the team may enter. It is important that a tube or to use paddles and the pull buoy. He
strength work continue as late as possible into says that these methods are a form of resistance
the season to retain strength gains. training and as such fit his definition of weight
Stretching exercises to keep the joints flex- training.
ible should always be an integral part of any
weight-training program. Nort Thornton (1979), The Biokinetic Swim Bench
one of the pioneers of weight training for swim-
Counsilman (1979) refers to biokinetics as the
ming when coaching world-record breaker
ultimate exercise, in that it permits a swimmer
Steve Clarke in 1961, stresses that strength train-
to accelerate the simulated swimming stroke
ing and flexibility work should always be done
while recruiting muscle fibers in the same se-
together and that it is a big mistake to do one
quence as actual swimming. The biokinetic
without the other.
machine is said to be the only exercise machine
Swimmers on Thornton’s team at the Uni-
capable of measuring work done in terms of
versity of California at Berkeley lift very heavy
force, time, and distance.
weights three days per week, on Monday,
Counsilman reports that swimmers at Indi-
Wednesday, and Friday. The other days—
ana University were tested once a week to
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday—are de-
assess the total amount of work that they could
voted to work done on the biokinetic swim
create in 10 seconds, 30 seconds, and 90 sec-
bench and geared toward developing speed
onds. He found that sprinters had the best
and strength.
scores for work done in 10 and 30 seconds, and
Ron Johnson (1978), another expert condi-
the middle- distance swimmers performed best
tioner of swimmers and a renowned master
over 90 seconds. When tested over five-minute
swimmer, also insists that deck training must
periods, the distance swimmers had the best
include exercises for the development of
results.
strength, endurance, and flexibility. He says
that though not all teams can afford expensive
Efficient Stroke Mechanics
and often elaborately equipped exercise ma-
chines, it is possible to do effective strength Much emphasis should be given to establish-
training with free weights. Johnson maintains ing efficient stroke mechanics in the early sea-
that most strength programs for swimming do son. (See also chapters 3 and 6.) Neglecting
not provide enough sets or repetitions, and he stroke technique partially defeats the purpose
points out that emphasis should be changed of training. A foundation of effective technique
from one muscle group to another after a par- should be laid during the early season. It is
ticular muscle group has been broken down good policy to include practices aimed at im-
through strenuous exercise. proving a swimmer’s ability to feel and control
Not all leading coaches have used weight the flow of the water. This should be done
training to the same extent, however. For ex- during warm-up and throughout the work-
ample, Jochums (1982) expresses the view that out.
weight training provides only psychological Emphasis should be placed on taking fewer
benefits and uses it with his sprint swimmers, strokes per length of the pool at a given speed.
who look at their arms in a mirror and believe In other words, keep the speed constant and
they have become stronger and thus will swim reduce the number of strokes per length. As the
faster. season progresses, speed should increase while
Jochums believes weight training transfers the number of strokes either remains the same
only a very slight gain to swimming but prob- or is reduced. Ability to reduce stroke frequency
ably enough to make a difference. He adds that while increasing speed is a reliable indication
women swimmers may need weight training, of a swimmer’s improving fitness and effi-
but his personal preference is for swimmers to ciency.

--- Page 186 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 171
The Two Main Aspects that the two types of training could not be
combined for optimal results over a long pe-
of Training
riod of time because improvement in base
Most descriptions of training routines refer to conditioning requires a large reserve of adap-
differences between duration and intensity of tation energy. (Adaptation energy permits the
exercise. Nort Thornton, one of America’s most body to respond favorably to increased stress
consistently successful coaches over a 30-year overload.) This reserve is quickly depleted by
period, brought these two terms into a more the fast swimming needed for sharpening work.
practical focus by referring to them as base Base training is like money in the bank, but
training and sharpening training, adding that a sharpening, when done properly, is like taking
correct combination of the two gives a swim- out the accumulated interest. When done im-
mer an overall capacity to swim a race in the properly, sharpening is like draining one’s fi-
most effective way (Thornton 1987). nancial reserves. Thornton outlines the follow-
Thornton describes base training as the inner ing characteristics of base training and
basic strength of the athlete that results from sharpening training.
years of training and produces a performance The swimmer’s base conditioning can be
without specific muscle adaptation for that measured by the performance he or she can
event. Such a base is usually best built through produce without specific muscular adaptation
long, slow-distance training at a pace well within for an event. This is best achieved through
one’s capacity for a long period of time. long, controlled swimming. The base has the
For sharpening work, Thornton recom- following features:
mended training techniques that produce effi-
• It can be improved continuously, even
cient muscular coordination for a chosen event.
over many years.
He believed that pace work, such as broken
• It can only be developed at a slow rate—
swims or ideal pace rehearsal swims, condition
in fact, much more slowly than the ob-
the reflexes for peak efficiency at speed. Sharp-
served improvement from sharpening
ening work is basically muscular and neuro-
training.
logical in nature, whereas base training condi-
tions primarily the circulatory system. • Its effects are long lasting and not easily
Thornton also said that a swimmer’s future destroyed. Swimmers who have taken
capacity to perform well in a given race de- the time to build a good base often ob-
pends on ideal proportions of base work and serve that competitive performance re-
sharpening. Too many swimmers were con- mains essentially the same even after a
stantly sharpening and devoting little time to considerable reduction in training.
developing the essential base conditioning. It • The slow pace used in its development
was important that enough time be devoted to and the requirement of freshness reduce
building the ideal base of aerobic endurance the likelihood of injury or illness.
necessary for world-class performance.
Sharpening adds muscular and neuromus-
Thornton added that any good engineer
cular efficiency to the circulatory efficiency
could gauge the approximate height and size of
gained from the swimmer’s base training.
a new building by looking at the size (depth
Sharpening training involves numerous rep-
and width) of the new foundation. A skyscraper
etitions of a short distance at a racing pace or
cannot be built without a large enough founda-
faster. The essential features of sharpening are
tion; nor can you expect to achieve world-class
as follows:
performance without an adequate base.
Thornton pointed out that although base • Its effects are short-lived and at times
training and sharpening training are neces- appear volatile. The high performance
sary for best results, they are in many ways level that results rarely lasts longer than
opposite from each other. His experience was three months.

--- Page 187 Text ---
172 Breakthrough Swimming
• When done properly, astonishing im- was higher than either of the other two. When
provement can be observed within just sharpening was added, optimal performance
six weeks. was attained.
Thornton summarizes his three hypotheti-
• Special care is necessary when attempt-
cal case histories by saying that the swimmer
ing this type of conditioning, for if not
who conditioned first with long, slow-distance
done properly it can result in perfor-
training is like a builder who lays a strong and
mances inferior to the athlete’s base.
deep foundation for a skyscraper. Swimmer A,
• The faster pace of this training more
who began with speed work, is like a builder
easily provokes injury and illness, which
who lays a weak foundation to get the first few
thus must be consciously avoided.
stories of the structure up quickly. Swimmer A
• Sharpening training can drive the ath-
showed the fastest initial improvement. How-
lete into a slump if continued too long. It
ever, just as the weak foundation severely lim-
must be terminated after about three
its the height to which the builder can build, so
months or when symptoms of energy
too inadequate conditioning limits the hasty
depletion are first noticed.
swimmer’s future performances. Swimmer B,
who combines base training and sharpening
In his classic presentation, Thornton (1987)
training throughout the year, eventually builds
outlines three hypothetical case histories in
to greatly improved performance in the senior
which swimmer A, swimmer B, and swimmer
year. However, swimmer C, who did sharpen-
C use different combinations of base training
ing training only before the most important
and sharpening training while training for the
races, was more successful than swimmer A
same event.
and swimmer B. Swimmer C started slowly
Swimmer A trained only at race pace or
and eventually surpassed the others because
faster using successive short-distance repeti-
this swimmer’s larger foundation provided
tions. Swimmer A’s performances, which were
the base from which higher and higher perfor-
erratic and sometimes totally unpredictable,
mances could be launched.
showed little basic improvement from the fresh-
man through senior year.
The Good and Bad Effects
Swimmer B wisely used a combination of
various forms of interval training throughout of Three Types of Training
the year but did not swim as hard or as fast
while training as swimmer A did. Swimmer B No one form of training suits every situation.
did not swim to depletion and maintained a Knowing the pros and cons of each regimen
wise balance of stress and recovery. Swimmer B helps coaches maximize the training effect.
also did not experience the extreme slumps Long, slow-distance training involves long
swimmer A did. Swimmer B’s base level im- swims at a steady pace, well within the capac-
proved significantly over four years and, when ity of the swimmer yet still requiring a real
combined with sharpening, resulted in greatly swimming effort (such as 1:00 to 1:15 per 100
improved performance in the senior year. yards). Usually, the swimmer stops long before
Swimmer C used the type of training that becoming exhausted. Long, slow-distance train-
produces optimal results over many years be- ing conditions the cardiovascular system, helps
cause it most dramatically improves the base develop robust health, helps prevent injuries,
level of the swimmer. Swimmer C did sharpen- produces continuous improvement (although
ing training only before the most important at a very slow rate), develops a swimmer’s base
races. The rest of the year, swimmer C trained level, and has a desharpening effect, thus per-
at a slower pace to improve the base level. mitting the swimmer to conserve adaptation
Although swimmer C spent much of the year energy. Unfortunately, long, slow-distance
training at base level, this swimmer performed training also has little effect on muscle strength
better in the senior year than swimmer A or and thus does not prepare a swimmer for fast
swimmer B because swimmer C’s base level racing, does not develop efficiency and coordi-

--- Page 188 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 173
nation for swimming at race pace, and has a and the oxygen system (aerobic). The duration
desharpening effect, resulting in slower racing of a swimming event determines which of these
times during midseason. three methods comes into effect during the
Distances covered in race pace training should activity. Most swimming events engage at least
be about three-fourths of the racing distance. two of the energy systems. Swimming events
This is perhaps the most taxing of all training of approximately one minute involve all three
techniques. Race pace training develops a keen systems. No matter what the duration, one
sense of race pace and teaches the swimmer to system usually dominates the other systems
relax at actual racing pace and to master effi- during any one event. Thus, if the energy sys-
ciency of movement. On the bad side, it also is tem predominant in an event is improved
very taxing to the swimmer, will quickly break through specific training, the swimmer’s per-
the swimmer down if done frequently, and formance in that event will also improve.
increases the likelihood of illness and injury by Let’s first look at the ATP-CP system. Creat-
producing greater fatigue than usual. ine phosphate (CP) and ATP are stored in the
Interval speed training, also known as repeti- muscles in relatively small quantities. Energy
tion training (see chapter 7), refers to frequent can be supplied by this system for a short time
repetitions of a short distance at a speed faster only, for example, a 25-yard sprint. If all-out
than race pace. Interval speed training teaches effort is continued for longer than approxi-
the swimmer to relax when swimming at speed, mately 10 seconds, energy is drawn increas-
helps the swimmer to learn efficient coordina- ingly from the LA system.
tion when swimming at speed, develops muscle After ATP-CP has been depleted, the pro-
strength, has a fast sharpening effect, and often duction of ATP depends on energy in the form
results in astonishingly rapid improvement. of sugar (glucose) stored in the muscles. The
Two bad effects of interval speed training are focus shifts to the lactic acid (LA) system. When
that it robs the swimmer of adaptation energy the supply of oxygen is inadequate, glucose is
and thus, if continued, could cause illness, broken down to lactic acid, allowing ATP to be
injury, or poor performances, and that it places produced. The accumulation of lactic acid and
a great strain on the tendons because of its fast oxygen debt become limiting factors to perfor-
pace and can easily result in injury. It can draw mance and are associated with painful fatigue.
a swimmer into a slump quickly if done im- All-out swimming for periods of one to three
properly. Thus, great care must be exercised to minutes draws energy primarily from the LA
see that interval speed training is effectively system.
performed, as it can improve a swimmer who ATP is manufactured most efficiently and
uses it well (Thornton 1987, p. 11). abundantly in the presence of oxygen (aero-
bic). Lactic acid and glycogen are resynthe-
The Energy Continuum sized by the supply of oxygen. The aerobic
system dominates in work over two minutes
long.
ATP (adenosine triphosphate) is a nucleotide
compound found in all cells but chiefly in
striated muscle. It is the energy source of the Chemical Changes in Muscle
muscles and is supplied to them in three ways.
In two of these ways, oxygen is not a prerequi- The primary chemical change in a contracting
site in producing ATP; these two methods are muscle is the oxidation (burning) of the carbon
called anaerobic, meaning “without oxygen.” In and hydrogen in the carbohydrate glycogen
the third method, oxygen is a prime ingredient and the production of carbon dioxide and wa-
in manufacturing ATP; this method is called ter as in any other engine. In the case of a
aerobic, meaning “with oxygen.” muscle, however, energy is stored in advance
The body’s three chemical systems for pro- of combustion in a readily available form, just
ducing ATP are the ATP-CP system (anaero- as an automobile battery is charged so that
bic); the lactic acid, or LA, system (anaerobic); electricity is immediately available for starting.

--- Page 189 Text ---
174 Breakthrough Swimming
The substance stored in the muscle is ad- exercise, before oxygen supply has been in-
enosine triphosphate. Through its two mol- creased by circulatory and respiratory adjust-
ecules of high-energy phosphate, ATP liberates ments. Second, it is used during exercise inten-
much more energy when split up than any sity in which all the energy cannot be supplied
other phosphate. Applying ATP to threads of by aerobic metabolism.
actomyosin (the sliding filaments in muscle During oxygen deficiency, the body makes a
fiber) causes them to contract. ATP is made little high-energy phosphate as a result of the
fairly rapidly from ADP (adenosine diphos- anaerobic breakdown of carbohydrate to lactic
phate) and from creatine phosphate, both of acid, which accumulates in the blood as lac-
which have high-energy phosphorus. tate. This waste of combustible lactate is un-
Storing energy as organic compounds of economical, but it makes the body more ca-
phosphorus enables a muscle to continue con- pable of withstanding a physical emergency.
tracting in the absence of oxygen for a long Figure 10.1 diagrams the chemical changes
time—indeed, until all its creatine phosphate that take place.
has been converted into creatine. It cannot,
however, recover without oxygen, for this is The fuel
The machine (carbohydrates)
necessary to recharge creatine and adenosine
with high-energy phosphate. The muscle may
therefore accumulate considerable oxygen debt.
Although a swimmer may take in a large
amount of oxygen during a race, it may not be
nearly enough to recharge the chemical sys-
tem. The swimmer must pay off the oxygen
debt by taking in a large amount of oxygen after
the race is over, which is often indicated by
continued breathlessness, for example, after a
100-meter swim.
Anaerobic Metabolism
When the oxygen supply is insufficient to pro-
vide all the needed energy from aerobic me-
tabolism, the balance of the energy requirement
is derived from anaerobic metabolism. Con-
tracting muscles produce lactic acid when their
supply of oxygen is inadequate to meet energy
requirements. Pyruvic acid is formed by glyco-
lysis and converted to lactic acid. This action
regenerates one of the factors (NAD+) required Adenine
to maintain glycolysis. The rise in the concen-
tration of lactic acid in the blood indicates the
amount of anaerobic metabolism involved.
The disadvantages of anaerobic metabolism
are the low yield of ATP (two molecules per
molecule of glucose utilized) and the forma-
tion of lactic acid. A further disadvantage un-
der some conditions is that only carbohydrate
can be used in anaerobic metabolism. In spite of
these drawbacks, anaerobic metabolism is in-
dispensable in two circumstances. First, it is an
immediate source of energy at the beginning of
yrevoceR
Actomyosin Glucose (of blood)
(by insulin)
E
ATP P Glycogen (of muscle)
Hexose phosphates
ADP
CP
Creatine
noitcartnoC
Liver
(cid:2)
P
(1
m
)
(cid:2)
P
(4
m Intermediate phosphates
)
(cid:2)
P
(36 Pyruvates
m
)
Air
Lactates
Oxygen
CO (cid:2) H O
2 2
Figure 10.1 The chemistry of muscle contraction.
The Lactate/Ventilatory Threshold
The more arduous the exercise, the more lactic
acid accumulates in the muscle cells and dif-
fuses into the bloodstream. Performance de-
clines once the amount of blood lactate reaches
a certain level.
By measuring heart rate and blood lactate we
can assess a swimmer’s response to different

--- Page 190 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 175
workloads. Pyne and Telford (1989), who did According to Morehouse and Miller, the
continuing research work on the pool deck for maximum rate of sustained work describes a
eight years with Australia’s leading international person’s ability to maintain steady state activ-
swimmers, confirmed that although lactate mea- ity at high levels of exertion. The aim of such
surements have contributed to a better under- training is to improve the athlete’s physical
standing of the physiology of swimming train- condition so that the organs can sustain a physi-
ing, coaches without access to lactate testing find ological equilibrium at increasingly higher lev-
that simply measuring heart rate provides very els of activity. In the process, a swimmer learns
useful information in training classifications. to recognize the maximum rate that can be
The exercise rate at which an athlete’s blood maintained in a physiological steady state.
lactate level, although elevated, will not con- Pyne and Telford (1989) make the important
tinue to rise is known as the lactate/ventilatory, observation that swimmers who swam so-called
or anaerobic, threshold. The average value is threshold sets often did not achieve their lac-
3.5 to 4.0 millimoles per liter and up for all tate and heart rate targets. They emphasize that
swimming distances, although Pyne and swimmers need to swim very fast when doing
Telford mention that this threshold can vary threshold workouts, adding that well-
from 3 to 6 millimoles in well-conditioned, conditioned swimmers should attain heart rates
middle-distance swimmers. of 180 to 190 beats per minute because when
Some physiologists maintain that 80 to 90 swimmers improve their aerobic fitness, higher
percent of training should be done at this level. speeds and heart rates can be achieved before
Improved speed over longer distance results the lactate/ventilatory threshold is reached.
from being able to swim faster while retaining
a lactate level equal to or lower than that previ- Work Time at Maximal Effort
ously produced at lower speeds. Years ago, I (Approximate Distance)
coined a saying in this connection: “The anaero-
bic work of today is the aerobic work of tomor- According to Counsilman (1975), work is mostly
row.” A good example of this is that there was anaerobic in events less than two minutes long
a time when beating 60 seconds for the 100- (approximately 200 meters). After two min-
meter crawl was considered a notable feat for a utes, the swimmer’s aerobic ability becomes
male swimmer and also was one that put him more important. For a 1,500-meter swim, the
into severe anaerobic distress. Top swimmers oxygen system provides approximately 90 per-
now regularly average well under 60 seconds cent of the energy used. Therefore training to
for each 100 meters over 400 meters, and swim- improve the transportation and utilization of
mers such as Kieren Perkins, Grant Hackett, oxygen at the cellular level should be the focus
Daniel Kowalski, Glen Houseman, Vladimir of a swimmer training for this event. Training
Salnikov, Chris Thompson, Alexi Filipets, examples include overdistance training and
Emiliano Brembilla, Erik Vendt, and Stefan short-rest interval training (table 10.1).
Pfieffer have accomplished this feat over 1,500 Counsilman pointed out that most literature
meters. confirmed that up to a pulse rate of 150 beats
The lactate/ventilatory threshold is not re- per minute, the energy source was aerobic. At
ally a new concept but merely a new term for a higher pulse rate, the body’s focus shifted to
what physiologists used to call “maximum an anaerobic source of ATP. Counsilman
steady state work” (Morehouse and Miller 1971) stressed, however, that pulse rate depends on
and what some coaches still term “fastest com- many factors. Thus factors such as emotion,
fortable pace.” Morehouse and Miller (1971) age, individual differences, the time since eat-
say that a constant level of oxygen intake dur- ing, and the time since drinking coffee should
ing exercise is not sufficient evidence of a steady be considered. For coaches and swimmers who
state. The oxygen consumption may be con- wanted to use pulse rate to determine when the
stant simply because the athlete has reached swimmer was performing aerobically and when
the maximal level of oxygen intake, yet lactic the swimmer was performing anaerobically,
acid may be accumulating. Counsilman provided the data in table 10.2.

--- Page 191 Text ---
176 Breakthrough Swimming
Table 10.1 Work Time at Maximal Effort (Approximate Distance)
Anaerobic work Aerobic work
(%) (%)
10 sec/25 m 85 15
60 sec/100 m 60–70 30–35
2 min/200 m 50 50
4 min/400 m 30 70
20 min/1,500 m 10 90
120 min/6,000 m 1 99
From Counsilman 1975. Reprinted by permission.
Table 10.2 Pulse Rate Related to Aerobic/Anaerobic Work
Pulse rate Aerobic work Anaerobic work
(bpm) (%) (%)
Under 120 Probably 100 * See note
120–150 90–95 5–10
150–165 65–85 15–35
165–180 50–65 35–50
Over 180 Depends on anaerobic Over 50
* Little or no benefit will be derived for developing the anaerobic systems.
From Counsilman 1975. Adapted by permission.
Counsilman warned, “In short sprints, this training is to build endurance—that is, to en-
table [table 10.2] has little validity. For example, able the athlete to swim farther and faster be-
in a sprint [25 yards] the work is almost com- fore lactate buildup in the muscles, with its
pletely anaerobic, but there is little increase in consequent lowering of the pH level. The
pulse rate.” gradual improvement in aerobic fitness even-
tually enables a swimmer to achieve a higher
Aerobic, Anaerobic, percentage of race speed before reaching the
and Sprint Training lactate/ventilatory threshold, at which point
the body begins to experience difficulty in sup-
There are three main types of training, the plying energy to the muscles by means of aero-
effects of which combine in proportion to the bic metabolism.
specific energy demands of the different swim- The modern theory of endurance training is
ming events. These three types of training are based on the belief that much of the work
aerobic, anaerobic, and sprint training. Aerobic should be performed at or slightly below the
training enables a swimmer to maintain a faster lactate/ventilatory threshold. This is commonly
rate of speed through the middle stages of a believed to occur when the blood lactate has
race. Anaerobic training helps a swimmer bet- reached approximately 4 millimoles per liter.
ter withstand the accumulative effects of fa- This type of training is known as threshold
tigue. Sprint training assists a swimmer in training, and its aim is eventually to produce
developing faster initial speed. less lactate at higher rates of speed.
Aerobic training is performed at submaximal Training at the lactate/ventilatory thresh-
levels of intensity. The primary aim of aerobic old is intended to improve aerobic function

--- Page 192 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 177
and will not improve a swimmer’s anaerobic fully monitored. This type of training should
capacity. An improvement in aerobic fitness be introduced in the training schedule at the
is indicated by faster swimming times ac- appropriate stage of the season, and even then
companied by lower blood lactate levels and it should not be used in more than two work-
heart rates. The development of improved outs a week because of its highly stressful
aerobic capacity requires a carefully devised nature.
long-term plan based on gradual progres- Sprint training is anaerobic and uses ATP
sion, year in and year out; by the same token, and creatine phosphate, which are stored in the
the resulting adaptation will be retained for a muscles in relatively small quantities. Only
long time. very short distances, for instance 12-1/2 to 25
Whereas the aim of aerobic training is to meters, should be used in sprint training be-
produce less lactate, anaerobic training aims to cause energy is drawn increasingly from the
produce more lactate by having the athlete lactic acid system if all-out effort continues for
perform work at greatly increased levels of more than approximately 10 seconds, and the
intensity, with the deliberate purpose of build- resulting fatigue disables the swimmer from
ing a high accumulation of lactic acid in the maintaining top speed. For the same reason,
muscles. The goal is to enable the muscle to the intervals between swims should be long
tolerate a high level of lactic acid and to im- enough to ensure that the swimmer is able to
prove its capacity to buffer the accumulating continue working at maximum speed.
lactic acid effectively while also stemming to
some extent a decrease in pH. Work performed
Effects of
at this higher level of intensity is often referred
Varying Training Intensities
to as lactate training.
The chemical changes resulting from severe
anaerobic training occur more quickly than Although the preceding sections outline differ-
the changes associated with aerobic training, ences among the three main forms of training,
but the effects are lost just as quickly, with a research has enabled further delineations
subsequent reduction in training. The inten- among relative levels of training intensity (table
sity of the anaerobic workload should be care- 10.3).
Table 10.3 Effects of Varying Training Intensities
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5
Type of training Low intensity Aerobic Anaerobic Race pace Short sprints
endurance endurance simulation (10–25 m)
(maximal
equilibrium)
Energy source Aerobic Aerobic Aerobic/ Anaerobic Anerobic
anaerobic lactic
Heart rate (bpm) 120–150 160–170 160–190 190–200 160–180
Maximal blood
lactate (mmol/L) 1–3 2–4 6–10 8–12 3–5
Effort (%) 80 85–95 90–95 100 100
Perceived exertion Comfortable Somewhat Hard work Hurtful Fast but
uncomfortable comfortable
Adapted from Absaliamov 1984 and Pyne and Telford 1988.

--- Page 193 Text ---
178 Breakthrough Swimming
Low Intensity of training may produce blood lactate concen-
trations of 6 to 10 millimoles per liter. The
Easy swimming—a comparatively relaxing
following sets are some examples:
activity—can be used as a warm-up, as active
(cid:2)
rest immediately after completing a race, or as 30 50 (30 to 60 seconds rest)
partial recuperation between high-intensity 15 (cid:2) 100 (30 to 120 seconds rest)
lactate swims. The heart rate may vary from (cid:2)
8 200 (30 to 120 seconds rest)
120 to 150 during the activity.
(cid:2)
8 400 (1 to 3 minutes rest)
Aerobic Endurance 4 (cid:2) 800 (3 to 5 minutes rest)
(Maximal Equilibrium) 5 (cid:2) 300 (8 minutes rest; faster than 400
pace)
Swimming at a high, steady pace provides a (cid:2) (cid:2)
8 150 (7 minutes rest; 4 150 on specialty,
level of intensity just below or at the lactate/ (cid:2)
4 150 in freestyle)
ventilatory threshold. The heart rate may vary
(cid:2)
8 200 specialty (last 50 of each 200 on
from 160 to 170. The following sets are some
butterfly; 2 minutes rest; 1 to 4 descend)
examples:
(cid:2)
8 200 individual medley (1 minute rest; 1
(cid:2)
30 50 (10 to 15 seconds rest)
to 4 descend)
(cid:2)
20 100 (10 to 15 seconds rest) (cid:2)
4 500 freestyle (3 minutes rest; 1 to 2
(cid:2)
8 200 (10 to 20 seconds rest) descend)
8 (cid:2) 400 (15 to 30 seconds rest; any stroke) 8 (cid:2) 200 (2 minutes rest; alternate 200 freestyle,
4 (cid:2) 800 (15 to 30 seconds rest) 200 specialty)
(cid:2)
8 200 individual medley (20 seconds rest)
Race Pace Simulation
1,500 meters freestyle (after the first 250
meters, overkick and fist swim on alternate Race pace simulation involves swimming sec-
laps) tions nearly as long as the racing distances at
(cid:2) race speed or faster. This type of work produces
4 1,500 freestyle (30 seconds rest)
(cid:2) severe anaerobic metabolism. The heart rate,
2 3,000 freestyle (2 minutes rest)
and probably the lactate concentration as well,
3,000 swim (first 1,400 meters freestyle, last
reaches maximum. The heart rate will be in the
1,600 meters individual medley in reverse
range of 190 to 200, again depending on the
order with continuous 400 on each stroke)
individual and level of fitness. The lactate con-
(cid:2)
10 100 kick (20 seconds rest; choice of centration reaches levels of 8 to 12 millimoles
specialty) per liter.
10 (cid:2) 100 pull (20 seconds rest; choice of All swims should start from a dive and be
specialty) accurately timed for future comparison against
other race pace simulations. A swimmer’s av-
To ensure that the muscle fibers used in the erage time per set indicates progress or lack
other strokes are also mobilized, aerobic train- thereof, so great importance should be placed
ing should not be done entirely in freestyle. on this type of training, which should be under-
taken only when a coach feels reasonably sure
Anaerobic Endurance
that the swimmer is motivated to the task. The
following sets are some examples.
Anaerobic endurance training consists of fast
swimming, in which the energy demands are For Sprinters
met aerobically and anaerobically. The heart
(cid:2)
15 50 (3 minutes rest)
rate will be between 160 and 190, depending on
(cid:2)
the individual and the level of fitness. This type 10 75 (3-1/2 minutes rest)

--- Page 194 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 179
(cid:2)
10 75 specialty with 25 freestyle easy swim- for only 1/4 minute at most, the intervening
back after each swim as active rest (sets 1 to rest intervals, even for these very short swims,
5 descend; on each fifth repeat try to improve should be about 2 to 3 minutes to permit CP
on the 75 split recorded on swimmer’s best- replacement.
ever 100 swim)
(cid:2) Proportions for the Training Season
6 100 (5 minutes rest)
(cid:2)
5 150 (5 to 10 minutes rest; last two 150 The percentage of varying training intensities
swims should be faster than the 150 split when averaged out in terms of a total seasonal
recorded on the swimmer’s best 200 swim) training program is approximately as follows
4 (cid:2) 200 (5 to 10 minutes rest) (see table 10.3, p. 177):
For Middle-Distance Swimmers Stages 1 and 2 (aerobic training): 50 to 60
percent
(cid:2)
20 50 (2-1/2 to 3 minutes rest)
Stage 3 (aerobic/anaerobic training): 20 to 25
(cid:2)
14 75 (3-1/2 minutes rest)
percent
(cid:2)
10 100 (5 minutes rest)
Stage 4 (anaerobic training): 3 to 5 percent
(cid:2)
7 150 (4 to 5 minutes rest) only
(cid:2)
5 200 (5 to 6 minutes rest) Stage 5 (anaerobic lactic): 5 to 10 percent
For Long-Distance Swimmers
Heart rate provides useful information when
(cid:2) access to lactate testing is unavailable.
10 200 (3 minutes rest)
(cid:2)
8 250 (3-1/2 minutes rest)
Outline of the
(cid:2)
7 300 (3-1/2 minutes rest)
(cid:2) Annual Training Program
5 400 (5 minutes rest)
(cid:2)
4 500 (6 minutes rest)
The annual training program (macrocycle) is
built on a series of microcycles (one-week peri-
Short Sprints
ods), which in turn form mesocycles (blocks of
several weeks) devoted to distinct phases of
Short sprints are short bursts at maximum speed
preparation. Each phase should exhibit an ideal
over distances of 10 to 25 meters but no farther.
balance between the volume and intensity of
Depending on the swimmer and the stroke, a
training specific to the development of desired
swim seldom lasts longer than 10 to 15 seconds.
physiological qualities. An excellent model of
This type of work develops speed and is not
ideal daily, weekly, and seasonal planning de-
exceptionally fatiguing unless carried out for a
signed by Ernest Maglischo (1985) is shown in
long time. All swims start from a dive. The
figure 10.2.
following sets provide some examples:
Realize that figure 10.2 represents an ideal;
(cid:2)
32 12-1/2 (2 minutes rest) much depends on a coach’s skill, feel, and plain
16 (cid:2) 25 (2 to 3 minutes rest) common sense in correctly proportioning the
(cid:2) workload and controlling the subtle transitions
16 25 (3 minutes rest; alternate 25 freestyle
from one phase of the season to the next. In
with 25 specialty; start from a dive and finish
addition, as the program enters its competitive
each 25 with a turn and complete pushoff)
phase, the requirements of preparing for spe-
Shorter sprints, such as 12-1/2 meters and 25 cific events need to be considered. The transi-
meters, are more effective than 50s and 100s for tions from one phase of preparation to the next
developing pure speed and the ability to swim are reflected in the size of the general workload,
without a buildup of blood lactate. Because as well as the volume and intensity of work,
creatine phosphate in the muscles tends to last and are shown in figure 10.3 (Bompa 1985).

--- Page 195 Text ---
Figure 10.2 Outline of an annual training program. From Maglischo 1985, p. 62. Reprinted by
permission.
180
yrotaraperp
lareneG
egats
yrotaraperp
laicepS
egats
egats
noititepmocerP
egats
noititepmoC
egats
gnidaolnU
egats
noitaraperp
tceriD
egats
noititepmoc
rojaM
doirep
lanoitisnarT
Planning the Season
1. Adjustment phase—2 to 4 weeks 2. Endurance phase—8 to 10 weeks
3. Competitive phase—4 to 6 weeks 4. Taper phase—1 to 3 weeks
Transition to competitive phase—1 to 2 weeks Transition to taper phase—1 to 2 weeks
Weekly Planning
Endurance phase
Mornings Afternoons Afternoons
Emphasis on aerobic endurance Monday, Wednesday, Friday Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday
1. Stroke drills 1. Long aerobic sets at optimal 1. Stroke drills and aerobic
2. Aerobic training pace—mix kicking, pulling, endurance sets at a slower
3. Occasional short sprints and swimming pace
4. Occasional long sprints 2. Short sprint sets 2. Major sprint sets
3. Occasional long sprint sets 3. Occasional long sprint sets
Competitive phase
Mornings—same as endurance phase
Afternoons Afternoons Afternoons
Monday and Wednesday Tuesday and Thursday Friday or Saturday
1. Major anaerobic sets 1. Stroke drills 1. Major sprint sets
2. Aerobic sets at optimal pace 2. Aerobic sets at slower pace 2. Stroke drills
3. Some short sprints 3. Pace work 3. Aerobic sets at slower speed
4. Some short sprints
Daily Planning
1. Warm-up 5. Major aerobic, anaerobic, race pace, or sprint set
2. Short sprints 6. Recovery set
3. Major aerobic set or minor aerobic set 7. Sprints, relays, fun sets
4. Recovery set—pulling, kicking, or stroke drill 8. Cool-down
Most
important
competition
General workload
Intensity of work
Volume of work
Preparatory
Competition period
period
Figure 10.3 Major training cycle: basic year-round training plan. From Bompa 1985.

--- Page 196 Text ---
Development of a Training Program 181
The Need for Interspersed
Mon. Tue. Wed. Thu. Fri. Sat. Sun.
Regenerative Periods
A.M. T T
One of the problems with designing charts and
P.M. T T T T T T
ideal training configurations is that we cannot
rely on swimmers to perform like clockwork
machines. Consequently, we can neither syn- Mon. Tue. Wed. Thu. Fri. Sat. Sun.
thesize training methods mechanically nor put
A.M. T T T T T T
them into neat pigeonholes to be used willy
nilly, irrespective of situational needs. Most P.M. T T T
experienced coaches develop a natural feel for
changing moods among the members of a team
Mon. Tue. Wed. Thu. Fri. Sat. Sun.
and may alter a planned workout simply as a
result of this type of empathy. This approach is A.M. T T T T T T
not witchcraft but merely the application of
P.M. T T T T
everyday common sense.
Paul Bergen (1985) says that some coaches Figure 10.4 The classification of microcycles,
fail to address the need for recovery and re- the number of training lessons: (top) microcycle
generation time within the training program. with eight training lessons; (middle) microcycle
He suggests that microcycles be grouped in with a 3 + 1 structure; (bottom) microcycle with a
periods of three building weeks followed by 5 + 1 structure. From Bompa 1985.
one regeneration week. This method can be
varied as a season progresses—for example,
four weeks of building followed by one week containing two sessions. Although there is no
of regeneration, then 3–1, 4–2, 2–2, and 1–1 as complete day off, the absence of morning ses-
the major competition of the season ap- sions during the week enables the swimmers to
proaches. sleep a little later before leaving for school. The
second chart depicts three workouts and one
The Number of Training Sessions off. This means that there is one day of two
in a Week workouts followed by a day with only one
workout. Then the swimmers have a complete
Bergen (1985) draws attention to the work of day off at the end of the week. The third chart
Tudor Bompa (1985) in classifying frequencies shows five training sessions followed by one
of training sessions within a one-week off. This pattern is repeated and then followed
microcycle (figure 10.4). by one day off. There are several other permu-
The first chart in the figure shows eight tations for applying the number of workouts in
workouts in a microcycle with only one day a microcycle.

--- Page 198 Text ---
Part IV
Past,
Present,
and Future
of the Sport

--- Page 200 Text ---
Chapter 11
Evolution of
Competitive
Swimming
The early 19th century saw a new
type of sporting encounter in which
two skilled swimmers would com-
pete for money in a staged chal-
lenge match. These match races,
usually swum in the sea, a canal, or
a river, marked the beginning of the
modern sport of competitive swim-
ming.
In a manner similar to the prize-
fighting ring, the swimmers com-
peted for a champion’s belt and a
money purse collected by specta-
tors who placed large bets and wa-
gers on the outcome. Because the
stopwatch had not been invented,
there were no times to be beaten or
used for comparison. The vagaries
of wind and tide had to be taken
into account, and a swimmer’s
knowledge of prevailing condi-
tions could contribute to the out-
come.
The people involved with these
match races were colorful but not
always the most savory members of
society. Many of the swimmers, and
those who bet on them, were well-
known regulars at the horse-racing
tracks and prize-fighting rings. It
was not unknown for a match race
to be fixed or roped in collaboration
with accomplices who made large
wagers on the race.
185

--- Page 201 Text ---
186 Breakthrough Swimming
Early Races Nevertheless, the society’s efforts resulted in
many clubs being formed in London.
Swimming in Japanese schools became an or-
ganized sport by Imperial edict as early as 1603,
Organized Matches
and Japanese interschool competitive swim-
ming has continued to the present time
On August 26, 1838, instead of merely staging
(Oppenheim 1970). Probably because of the
the usual race between two swimmers, the
isolated nature of Japanese culture for many
National Swimming Society held the first an-
centuries, Japan’s early start did not influence
nual grand match between 12 swimmers in the
other countries to follow suit.
Serpentine River. The first prize was a silver
Although Japan held a giant three-day swim
medal of exquisite workmanship and one
meet in 1810, competitive swimming was not
guinea in money. Second prize was a bronze
organized on a regular basis until John Strachan,
medal from the same die and a half-guinea.
a London wine merchant, formed the National
Third prize was a metal medal. Much money
Swimming Society in 1837. He later changed
was lost and won by gentlemen betting on the
the name to the British Swimming Society, in
competitors.
the belief that this would be more comprehen-
On August 4, 1839, it was announced that a
sive than national.
gold medal and chain, valued at 20 guineas,
Until the start of the National Swimming
would be competed for in London by the 12
Society, newspapers hadn’t mentioned swim-
yearly champions, each from a different town
ming. Then a report of a swimming match in
or place. (This was the first time that the word
the Serpentine River appeared in Bell’s Life, a
champion was used in the sport of swimming.)
sporting newspaper, on August 6, 1837. From
The gold medal and chain were to become the
that time, swimming was regularly reported in
property of the swimmer—the champion of
the press, and the sport grew in popularity.
champions—who won it for four successive
While Strachan was said to have done an
seasons.
enormous amount for the advancement of
swimming, like many officials in the history of
The Need for Public
the sport, he was a master of the art of self-
aggrandizement. When the National Swim- Swimming Pools
ming Society issued a medal to commemorate
its foundation, John Strachan was not above At the beginning of the 19th century, public
having his own portrait, with the words “John swimming pools, as we know them today, did
Strachan of Perthshire, born 7th of January not exist. People swam in the sea or wherever
1806” appear on one side, while the obverse there was a suitable and safe stretch of water
side said “National Swimming Society founded such as a canal, a local pond, or a lake.
by John Strachan, 30th of June 1837” (Thomas Many of the leading schools in England en-
1904). Commenting on this, Thomas said, couraged their pupils to learn to swim. Races in
a nearby river or pond became part of the
Though not on record, there can be little
school sports curriculum. But, for the working
doubt that, like many a greater man, he
classes, the industrial revolution had made the
paid for these things himself. It is impos-
problems of urban life acute and pressing, and
sible for the present generation, accus-
whole families, including children, were in-
tomed to orderly galas graced by the pres-
volved in industrial labor. People in large towns
ence of ladies to imagine the degraded
and cities had little access to places suitable for
condition of swimming in those days, and
swimming. Indeed, their time was mainly oc-
for many years after. Any swimming en-
cupied by coping with the harsh conditions in
tertainment was the resort of low class
which they lived. Few of them had the chance
characters, who chiefly went to the bath
for betting purposes (Thomas 1904, p. 249). to learn to swim, and drownings were almost a

--- Page 202 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 187
daily occurrence, as confirmed by newspapers will [now] be no excuse for bodily filth in the
of the period. neighbourhood.”
Fast-growing populations caused great con-
gestion, and early-century epidemics of chol- Engineering to the Rescue
era with heavy mortality often swept through
The Act provided for indoor and outdoor
cities and towns. Control of disease depended
swimming baths, warm or cold slipper baths,
on the development of a higher standard of
vapor and shower baths, and wash houses for
living with clean water supplies and efficient
laundry. The growing popularity of swim-
and hygienic sewage disposal.
ming, due mainly to the energy of swimming
The Baths and Wash-Houses Act clubs, made the actual swimming pool a re-
munerative feature of the new public bath
In 1834, barrister Edwin Chadwick showed houses. In locations where population size
that expenditure on the poor and the preven- warranted it, it was usual to construct three
tion of disease were two sides of a single coin. types of swimming pools: the first-class bath,
Most people had no running water in their 100 feet by 40 feet; the second-class bath, 120
homes, and Chadwick’s measures to reform feet by 40 feet; and the women’s bath, 60 feet
the poor law included provision of increased by 40 feet.
water supplies and improved sanitation. It was compulsory to provide a shower and
In August 1842, the British Swimming Soci- soap-hole for laborers coming from dirty work
ety presented a petition signed by 322 persons to use before entering the swimming bath
in favor of extra bathing places. The petition (Sinclair and Henry 1903). It became a novelty
stated that over 2,000 people drowned annu- for people to have a good wash and scrub down
ally, 350 in London alone, mainly attributable before they entered the pool to try their skill at
to the neglect of the art of swimming (Thomas the new sport of swimming, often under the
1904). instruction of an ever-growing number of so-
The Baths and Wash-Houses Act, which re- called swimming professors.
ceived Royal Assent on August 26, 1846, en- Before electricity was invented, the effective
abled local authorities to provide swimming heating of water in the new swimming baths
baths and wash houses. The Whitechapel Baths, was a problem because of unnecessary waste of
then under construction, were regarded as a water and fuel. Water was expensive, costing
model to be copied. By 1852, seven more such from four-pence to one shilling per 1,000 gal-
establishments existed, estimated to have been lons. A simple but noisy system of circulating
used by 800,000 bathers. warm water into the pool was to inject jets of
The building of these first baths were events live steam through a perforated pipe directly
of immense social and political significance. into the bottom of the deep end. The pipe had
Usually situated in areas of great deprivation, to be insulated to prevent bathers from being
they improved the lives of many thousands of scalded.
people. With the provision of copious hot wa- The water was constantly circulated,
ter and steam, they also represented a triumph warmed, aerated, and purified, then forcibly
of early Victorian engineering. returned through patent spreaders placed at
Many people in the middle and upper classes equal distances over the floor of the bath. This
contributed large sums of money to these bath- method was said to heat the water uniformly,
building projects not only because they had thereby eliminating the cold patches of water
social consciences, but because they regarded frequently found in baths heated by other sys-
the urban poor as sources of disease and poten- tems. The cost of heating was reduced to a
tial troublemakers requiring moral improve- minimum as cold water did not need to be
ment. As The London Times for May 12, 1847, put introduced into the bath so frequently (Sinclair
it in its report on the Whitechapel Baths, “there and Henry 1903).

--- Page 203 Text ---
188 Breakthrough Swimming
The Need for Standardized tional level, it was to be a long time before
competitions were held over standard distances.
Distances
Some 28 years passed after the revival of the
Olympic Games at Athens in 1896 before the
There grew a need for standardized racing dis-
Olympic swimming events were conducted in
tances, but it was to be a long time before the
the 50-meter course we know today.
authorities constructed pools of standard di-
mensions to ensure uniform racing conditions. It is difficult to imagine competition without
Racing distances were regulated according to regulation-size pools, standardized distances,
the size of the pool. Even when such facilities and precise time measurements, yet these chal-
were built, architects often failed to consult with lenges faced the organizers of the first swim-
the potential users, resulting in the omission of ming competitions. More often than not, the
features necessary for competitive swimming. size of the course governed the length of the
race. The first swimming races bore no resem-
Most races held in inland towns were over
blance to modern swim meets in which eight
short distances in measured swimming pools.
swimmers, each in an assigned lane, compete
Long-distance races were the exception; these
over a set distance in a measured course, at the
were staged in canals, lakes, and reservoirs. At
end of which their times and placings, elec-
the coast, long-distance competitions were usu-
tronically recorded, are displayed on a large
ally held in the sea between piers or breakwaters.
board at the end of the pool.
Officials would have preferred to see more
Variations in racing distances even affected
long-distance racing in the open sea and in
the swimming events at the Olympics in Ath-
swimming pools. However, short-distance
ens, Paris, and St. Louis, and made a uniform
events were financially more successful. For a
list of records impossible. One of the main
short race they could easily secure over 100
objectives of the Amateur Swimming Associa-
entries, while for a long race an entry list of 20
tion (ASA) was to stimulate public opinion in
swimmers was considered good. In open water,
favor of building swimming pools. The ASA
220 yards and 500 yards were the best racing
published a list of 800 bathing places in 460
distances; but for swimming pools any race
towns. Of these, almost 600 contained swim-
over 100 yards would not be well supported.
ming baths. According to Sachs (1912), although
Apart from irregular pool dimensions, other
a number of baths were built, most were totally
criticisms included impractical and inconve-
inadequate for the purpose of competitive
nient location of spectator and dressing room
swimming.
space, inadequate facilities for the growing
number of female swimmers, uncomfortable
water temperature, and lack of lane lines on the The Royal Life Saving Society
floor of the pool. An uninterrupted view could
rarely be obtained “without fear of splashings During the Victorian period, swimming was
and drenchings” (Sachs 1912, p. 242). Dirt and encouraged in most English public schools.
grit were carried into the baths by people wear- Although a growing appreciation existed of
ing muddy boots. The entrance was often a the health benefits of the sport, the main con-
large door, opening directly onto the pool deck, sideration was safety. Death from drowning
through which icy blasts caused swimmers was common because most of the population
extreme discomfort. could not swim.
Competitive swimming in its present form The Royal Life Saving Society encouraged
resulted largely from the evolution of the artifi- the teaching of swimming because it viewed
cial environment of the measured pool. The swimming as a way to save life, which it held
modern swimming complex is a far cry from the should be the main objective of the activity. It
first public bath halls and washing houses or promoted competitive swimming because the
even the first public swimming baths, divided speed and endurance developed by racing
as they were according to social class and sex would enable a rescuer to reach a drowning
and built in a diversity of sizes. At the interna- person fast. The ability to swim quickly was

--- Page 204 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 189
encouraged by holding school swimming sports they traveled so fast through the water, and
at set times of the year. they were ignorant of the peculiarity of action
The first swimming promoters realized that that gave them such power over their rivals.
the future of the sport depended on introduc- Many professional swimmers used movements
ing swimming to school children. Reports of that were
the time suggest a certain social tinge to the
. . . completely the reverse of being correct,
developing structure of the sport; “the records
or in accordance with any rule, or recog-
of the Public Schools gives assurance that the
nized law governing the swimming mo-
future at any rate of one class of Englishmen as
tions, but whose very ignorance accounted
swimmers is secure” (Sachs 1912, p. 39). Not all
not only for their own egotism, but was
parents encouraged their children to swim;
the cause of oft-repeated mistakes and
many withheld permission because of super-
distorted ideas of swimming. To be a suc-
stition concerning imagined ill effects of pro-
cessful teacher of the art of swimming
longed immersion and physical strain, and the
requires almost as much thought, applica-
risk of contracting disease from water. Accord-
tion, hard work, and constant practice as
ing to Brasch (1970), as late as 1880 a rhyme of
almost any branch of education or science
unknown authorship was popularly quoted:
(Wilson 1883, pp. 24–25).
Mother, may I go out to swim?
According to Thomas (1904), the system of
Yes, my darling daughter;
teaching advocated by Professor Stevens, who
Hang your clothes on a hickory limb, claimed that he had taught upward of 12,000 to
But don’t go near the water. swim in 10 years, was “all humbug and his
instruction is not good.” For example, Thomas
The common fear of swimming prompted said that Stevens had given out such advice as
the Southern Counties Branch of the ASA to the need to always keep ones eyes open when
publish a small pamphlet titled Can You Swim?, diving because so many people had drowned
containing articles by eminent doctors on the by keeping their eyes shut!
benefits of swimming. Wilson said that he hoped to see the day
when the title of professor would mean some-
Professors of Swimming thing different. He also wanted to see would-be
professors pass an examination to prove them-
Old-time coaches—swimming masters or profes- selves qualified for the title. In similar vein,
sors of swimming, as they sometimes called them- Sinclair and Henry (1903) said that a code of
selves—often exuded an aura of secrecy. “Come fixed principles should be laid down so that the
and be coached by me and I’ll teach you tech- profession could be built on a sound founda-
nique,” they would say. “You see, swimming is tion, but that attempts to institute certificate
really nothing more than pulling and kicking, examinations had been foiled by those who
but it’s done in this certain way and that is . . . would chiefly benefit by them.
technique!” But eventually, intelligent swim- Thomas (1904) criticized the common prac-
mers expected to be told why they were being tice of publishing a work under the name of a
advised to use a particular method. They be- well-known professional swimmer to gain cred-
came tired of the clichés, the old hand-me- ibility, even if the swimmer was not a writer.
downs, the platitudes and folklore that had Thomas pointed out the poor quality of the
become part of the repertoire of many a so- materials swimmers endorsed, probably for
called swimming professor. financial consideration. Thomas said that many
Wilson (1883) said that it was a mistake to swimming books were nothing more than mis-
suppose that a man who was a good swimmer erable pieces of ignorant scissors-and-paste
and a successful competitor would also be a compilation.
good teacher. Many really good swimmers In the late 19th century, a swimmer could not
could not tell, and really did not know, why lay claim to being an expert unless he could do

--- Page 205 Text ---
190 Breakthrough Swimming
Ralph Thomas, Swimming’s First Historian
Ralph Thomas, a little-known man who seemed to have shunned the limelight, was
swimming’s first historian. With great dedication, he researched everything written or
illustrated on swimming, from antiquity to the end of the 19th century. Thomas was born in
1840 and was a lawyer by profession. His book Swimming (1904) is recognized as the most
important bibliography of swimming. Archibald Sinclair, a noted English authority on
swimming, said in the Swimming Magazine, January 1915, “This book is a mine of wealth for
it contains a record of every known book on the subject up to 1904 (Cureton 1934, p. 86).”
Thomas lists all the important works on swimming published in English, German, French,
and other European languages. It is a remarkable biography, history, and annotated
bibliography, with upwards of 100 illustrations. Thomas published a much shorter version
of the book in 1868, but after 36 years (1904) the author, now in failing health and not
satisfied with his first effort, published the second edition (488 pages), which over the years,
has become the much-prized gem for the rare-book collector.
scientific and trick swimming. There were varia- version of the chronograph developed by E.D.
tions on this theme, such as fancy swimming and Johnson in 1855, but it was not until 20 years
acrobatic swimming, which were probably the later that an affordable stopwatch became gen-
ancestors of modern synchronized swimming. erally available for timing sporting events.
These feats required much painstaking practice, When horse racing became popular in the mid-
and any swimmer who attempted them in pub- 1850s, a wide variety of timing devices were
lic before attaining perfection risked appearing patented but none came into general use. In
ludicrous and absurd. But the leading profes- 1859, the American Watch Company of
sionals were very popular attractions at swim- Waltham, Massachusetts, patented the
ming galas where they gave great entertainment chronodrometer for timing horses. However,
and interest to their patrons and earned large the sweep hand was not the fly-back type we
purses in doing so (Sinclair and Henry 1903). know today and had to be constantly reset.
The first stopwatches had a lever that liter-
The Advent of the Stopwatch ally stopped the watch by interfering with the
train. This was obviously an unsatisfactory
The stopwatch was to competitive swimming method for obtaining elapsed time since the
what the wheel was to civilization. Greater starting time was arbitrary and the stopping
emphasis was placed on speed and not only caused the watch to be wrong as a timepiece. To
who placed first, second, or third. The efficiency overcome this problem, some watches used
of the evolving speed strokes—overarm side- two trains: one for the conventional timepiece
stroke, trudgen, and crawl—could be tested and one that could be stopped and started at
more accurately and scientifically. An additional will, which drove a separate second hand. The
benefit was the possibility of comparing perfor- hand sometimes moved in one-second jumps.
mances recorded in different towns and even This type of watch was an improvement but
countries, provided they were recorded over still lacked two vital ingredients of the modern
the same distances and in the same size pools. concept of a stopwatch—the ability to count
Pocket watches were first used to discover elapsed times of greater duration than a minute,
how long it took to perform some action; a which necessitated a minute counter to be suc-
general term for these is stopwatches. Some- cessful, and the convenience of starting the
times they are called chronographs, but since counting hand from zero each time to avoid the
this implies a written record of the time, the need for arithmetic, which necessitated a reset
term is not correct. The stopwatch was a cheaper device. These two functions were achieved in

--- Page 206 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 191
the mid-19th century. In 1842, Nicole patented The general management of swimming
a reset system for a second hand that could be meets, especially those held in what were called
independently stopped and started; and in 1862 baths, improved vastly during the last 10 years
the now-familiar three-press button system was of the 19th century. Organizers first had to
patented (Cutmore 1985). In the 1860s, Swiss obtain a permit from the Amateur Swimming
watchmakers successfully tackled the problem Association (ASA) before holding a meet be-
and succeeded in making cheaper watches. cause amateurs put their amateur status in
According to records, the first timed swim- jeopardy if they competed in an unsanctioned
ming race was the English one-mile champion- meet (Sinclair and Henry 1903).
ship of 1869 swum in the River Thames, from Where competitions were held in open wa-
Putney Aqueduct to Hammersmith Bridge. As ter, the tides had to be considered before fixing
far as can be ascertained, the winner of that a date for the competition. In addition, care had
event, T. Morris, was the first champion ever to to be taken to avoid clashing with another meet
be timed (27 minutes 18 seconds). in the same district, as otherwise both could be
Official lists of records were soon published. run at a loss.
The first official swimming record belonged to The ASA advised organizers of swim meets
Winston Cole, who in 1871 swam 100 yards in to do everything possible for the comfort of the
1 minute 15 seconds. His time was ratified by competitors; otherwise swimmers would ab-
the recently formed Metropolitan Swimming stain from entering the next season. They ad-
Club Association. vised that it was bad policy to ask competitors
Later, the building of swimming pools of to undress in a wretched, ill-ventilated room in
measured length made handicap races popular order to accommodate more spectators. Ar-
in the 19th century. The idea behind handicap rangements made for competitors at some open-
races was to even out the competition and give water meetings, particularly in the sea, were
slower swimmers an opportunity to excel. The perhaps the worst. Sometimes competitors were
handicapping system also provided spectator required to undress in small cabins, the floors
excitement at a time when there were few fast of which were often wet and filthy, so that their
swimmers. Handicapping probably also pro- clothes could not be put down. Organizers
vided leeway for people wishing to covertly didn’t have to provide a drawing room, but a
place bets or stakes on the outcome of a race. decent dressing room added greatly to the popu-
The slowest swimmers started first, and then larity of any club’s annual gala (Sinclair and
the handicapper walked behind each waiting Henry 1903).
swimmer, shouting out the time off the ticking Accounts of three different swimming meets,
stopwatch. As each swimmer’s handicap time two of them for amateurs and one for profes-
was called, that swimmer started and chased sional swimmers, described in The London Times
after the swimmers who had already taken off. of September 18, 1899, provide a good idea of
There was an objection to accepting records set what these late-19th-century competitions were
in handicap races because of the unfair advan- like.
tage gained by having a pacemaker. The first race described, the Ulph Annual
Challenge Cup Competition for Amateurs, was
Swim Meets in the held in the sea at Yarmouth. The London Times
described the course:
Late 19th Century
The course was, as usual, between the
The London Swimming Club did much to pro- Britannia and the Wellington Piers, a dis-
mote swimming in its early days. There was tance of about 1,000 yards, with the tide,
still very little difference between profession- and, though a stiff breeze was blowing off
als and amateurs. In those days, if the glove the land, the sea was pleasantly calm and
was thrown down, anyone could pick it up. At the conditions favourable, as was proved
all the chief events, betting was widespread by the fact that the winner accomplished
and of more importance than the swimming. the record time of 9 min. 8 sec.

--- Page 207 Text ---
192 Breakthrough Swimming
The winner, J.A. Jarvis, had the outside sta- Early Professional Swimmers
tion at the beginning of the race but shifted his
course seaward to take advantage of the faster As the popularity of competitive swimming
tide. Jarvis’s strategy was copied by two of his grew, professional swimmers began to emerge.
competitors, Sharp and Pugh. At the halfway One of the first notable professional swim-
mark, Jarvis led by about 20 yards, Sharp was mers was Charles Steedman. Steedman
second, and Arnold, another competitor, was learned to swim in 1843 at the age of 13, and by
third. The swimmers finished in that order; the age of 15 was a professional swimmer
Jarvis finished about 50 yards ahead of Sharp who already had won the then princely sum
with a winning time of 9 minutes, 8 seconds. of 10 pounds in a race over 400 yards, the
Arnold was third. Pugh finished in fifth place. longest distance swum in those days. At 19, he
The London Times went on to describe the 100 won the Championship of England from
yards Amateur Championship of 1899. In this George Pewters, a master of the sidestroke,
race, eight swimmers competed in three trial the new racing style of the day. In 1852 and
heats. The three trial winners competed against 1853, Steedman beat Frederick Edward
each other. J.H. Derbyshire of the Manchester Beckwith, nine years his senior, for the Surrey
Osborne Swimming Club, who won the same Club Championship, the event commonly
race in 1898, led throughout the race and fin- regarded as the Championship of England.
ished two yards ahead of F.C.V. Lane of East Thomas (1904) said that after this defeat,
Sydney, the Australian champion. Lane fin- Beckwith declined to swim against Steedman
ished half a yard ahead of W.H. Lister of the again. Steedman took the prize belt with him
Manchester Osborne Swimming Club. when he emigrated to Australia in 1854, where
Derbyshire won with a time of 60-2/5 seconds, he kept it as a prized possession until the end
“one-fifth of a second slower than the record he of his life.
established when he won last year.” The champion of England in 1844 was George
The record referred to by The London Times Pewters (then about 17), who swam against
was, in effect, the official world record. Thus, Samuel Hounslow (then about 38) of Oxford
since this was Derbyshire’s last championship for 50 pounds on September 2 in the Serpentine
appearance of the 19th century, he can justly be at 7:00 in the morning. Pewters gained the
labeled the fastest swimmer of the 19th cen- beach 20 yards ahead of his competitor; never
tury. was there such a feat of dexterity. George Pew-
Finally, The London Times recounted the ters is generally credited with introducing the
County of London Long-Distance Professional sidestroke. Thomas (1904) gives further infor-
Championship that had been held the day mation about Pewters in his published corre-
before on September 17, 1899. Swimmers com- spondence with Charles Steedman who had
peted for the 60-guinea challenge cup on a emigrated to Australia.
course 5 miles, 60 yards long, from Kew to On September 25, 1842, in winning the 1842
Putney. Although six entries were received, championship, Pewters swam across the Ser-
only three swimmers—Titchener of Putney, pentine and back in 6-3/4 minutes. In 1839 and
Harrison of Raynes Park, and Charles Ball of 1840 he joined other champions of the National
Battersea—competed in the race. Tide and Swimming Society—Kenworthy of London and
weather conditions delayed the start for over Hounslow of Oxford—with Charles Lewis, the
an hour. At about 5:00, the men dived into London champion, in the first great contests of
very cold water. Titchener and Harrison even- the kind of swift, long, and fancy swimming for
tually withdrew from the competition, leav- speed, distance, scientific swimming, and in-
ing Ball to finish the race alone. Ball’s final deed tricks of all descriptions. In 1848 Pewters
time was 1 hour, 35 minutes, and 59 seconds, competed in a number of challenge races, one
“which, although slow time, was a good per- with Fred Edward Beckwith of the Lambeth
formance under the bad conditions that pre- Bath and others with Professor Stevens and
vailed.” Harold Kenworthy.

--- Page 208 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 193
Samuel Hounslow was a shoemaker in The northerners, who earned their living as
Holywell Street, Oxford, as well as a teacher of professional swimmers, rose to combat the in-
swimming. He won the National Swimming roads—in the form of suspensions—made by
Society medal for completing 400 yards in 7 the interfering southerners. Enforcing the ama-
minutes, 9 seconds, swimming in the Thames teur rules throughout the country became a
at Oxford. While teaching swimming, he could difficult task, especially as many local corpora-
stay in the water for 5 or 6 hours a day. tions held out the temptations of money and
Henry Gurr, known as the Pocket Hercules, value prizes at their regattas.
was originally a shoeblack at Endell Street Baths, The ASA eventually won the day but not
London. Occasionally in recognition for his before such fine swimmers as T. Cairns,
assistance to the attendant, George Dunham, J. Nuttall, W. Evans, S.W. Greasely, J.H. Tyers,
Gurr was allowed to swim in the pool, an and D. Billington had been declared profes-
opportunity he often used, staying in the water sionals. Among them they had shared most of
for hours at a time. On July 22, 1863, Gurr won the championships, from 100 yards to 1 mile.
the Fraser gold medal in the Serpentine. He Every year attempts were made to separate
was also a talented trapeze artist, and in 1870 he amateurs from professionals in all contests but
left England with the Hanlon Acrobats. without success, with the result that the strictly
amateur clubs would not join the new Swim-
Professional versus Amateur ming Association of Great Britain.
Earlier in 1880 the Amateur Athletic Asso-
The Professional Swimming Association was
ciation (track and field) had adopted a defini-
formed on July 6, 1881, as a result of a decision
tion of an amateur at their inaugural meeting.
of the Swimming Association of Great Britain.
When the ASA was finally able to hold a meet-
However, it collapsed within a few years
ing on June 28, 1880, Dr. Hunter Barron (Otter
(Sinclair and Henry 1903). The Professional
Club), Horace Davenport (Ilex Club), H. Ben-
Swimming Association became the wealthiest
jamin (Cygnus Club), H.H. Griffen (London
swimming institution in England or elsewhere,
Athletic Club), and a number of other well-
and it might have gone on prospering if its
known supporters proposed the adoption of
financial stability had not been wrecked, but
the Amateur Athletic Association’s definition
ultimately the members killed it (Watson 1873).
of an amateur.
By 1881 the ASA was receiving steady sup-
What Is an Amateur?
port, but the growing amount of office work
Thomas Arnold’s introduction of sports as regu- became difficult to handle, and the govern-
lar extracurricular activity in English public ment of amateur swimming became chaotic. A
schools spurred a great development of sports swimmer who had been declared a profes-
during the late Victorian age. This athletic re- sional at one meeting would be declared an
vival of the 19th century led to the restoration amateur at the next. On April 7, 1884, the Otter
of the ancient Olympic Games at Athens in Club and eight or nine other clubs resigned
1896 and also revived what was said to be the their membership in the association over the
classical ideal of amateurism. lax administration of the new amateur laws
For a long time the future of the ASA was in and formed a new body named the Amateur
jeopardy because often for profitable reasons, Swimming Union (ASU). A feud commenced
not everyone wanted to be an amateur. Only between the Swimming Association of Great
after its membership spread sufficiently did Britain and the newly formed ASU.
the ASA finally have the power to enforce its For two years the struggle for supremacy
amateur laws. This caused much friction be- continued until finally, in 1886, Mr. H. Ben-
tween the amateur southern counties and the jamin of the Cygnus Club managed to bring the
professional swimmers of the north of England, leaders together to sort out their differences
many of whom were the fastest in the world at and form a new body, the Amateur Swimming
all distances. Association, with a revised set of rules.

--- Page 209 Text ---
194 Breakthrough Swimming
Open Revolt Against Amateur Laws a meeting in the German Gymnasium in Lon-
don, England, the sport spread gradually to
In 1889 the enforcement of these rules and the
other countries. Initially, the two big centers
consequent suspension of some Manchester
were England and Australia, and it is interest-
swimmers led to an open revolt in the north.
ing to note the influence of the one on the other,
Representatives from the south went to
even though separated by thousands of miles.
Manchester to address a crowded meeting of
Each new country to adopt competitive
swimmers who had been worked up to a spirit
swimming inevitably followed the constitu-
of antagonism by writers in the press.
tional formula designed by the officials of En-
After a long discussion it was resolved, on
glish swimming. They also applied the defini-
the casting vote of the chairman, that the scheme
tion of amateurism, which was apparently
brought forward by the southerners be accepted
based in large measure not on altruism but on
as a basis of settlement. The ASA removed the
the prevailing class consciousness in Great Brit-
suspensions that had created the difficulty and
ain. With the rebirth of the so-called Olympic
agreed to recognize the jurisdiction of the north-
movement, it became clear that universally
ern counties’ ASA over all swimming matters
accepted rules would be necessary if competi-
north of 53 degrees latitude.
tion was to be conducted on a consistent basis.
The first general meeting under the new
In 1908, at the Olympic Games in London,
constitution took place in London on April 12,
George Hearn, president of the English Swim-
1890. The new association now consisted of 135
ming Association, was asked to establish an
clubs from all over England. (A New Zealand
Olympic swimming code. He was assisted in
Amateur Swimming Association was formed
his deliberations by Englishman William Henry,
in 1890 by R. St. Clair of Auckland, with a
Max Ritter of the United States, and Hjalmar
constitution similar to that of the English asso-
Johnson of Sweden. Hearn realized that a more
ciation.)
farsighted policy would be to establish rules
that could be applied on a permanent basis and
The Question of Open Betting
not only for the Olympic Games.
in Amateur Sport
To achieve this aim, George Hearn decided to
use the opportunity of the Olympic meeting in
The continuing problem of open betting at race
London to form an international swimming
meetings resulted in a gathering of the govern-
association. Because representatives from 10
ing bodies of athletics, cycling, and swimming
nations (England, Germany, Denmark, Swe-
in London on March 29, 1889, to discuss the
den, France, Ireland, Finland, Hungary, Bel-
situation, which prevented the more respect-
gium, and Wales) were participating in the Lon-
able members of the community from taking
don Olympic Games, Hearn called a meeting to
part or interest in many competitions.
set up an international governing body of swim-
They decided to try to detect competitors in
ming with a set body of laws. On July 19, 1908,
any way in league with bookmakers because
at the Manchester Hotel in London, the Federa-
they believed that this was the direct cause of
tion Internationale de Natation Amateur (FINA)
roping and other malpractice. (A swimmer was
was formed. The swimming code of FINA was
said to “rope” when he did not exert himself to
based on the model of the English ASA.
the utmost to hide his true ability, thereby
In addition to its swimmers competing in the
drawing better odds for betting purposes
Olympic Games, FINA introduced the World
(Sinclair and Henry 1903).)
Long-Course Swimming Championships in
1972. The inaugural meet was held in Belgrade
The Growth
in 1973. In 1992, FINA introduced the World
of International Swimming
Short-Course Swimming Championships. The
and the Birth of FINA inaugural championships were held in Majorca
in 1993. Figures 11.1 and 11.2 show the total
After January 7, 1869, when competitive swim- number of long-course and short-course records
ming was first placed on an organized basis at set per year.

--- Page 210 Text ---
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
0 10 20 30
Total records
195
raeY
40 50 60
Figure 11.1 World long-course records, 1957–2000. Graph provided by Nick Thierry.

--- Page 211 Text ---
196 Breakthrough Swimming
1991
1992
1993
1994
Champions of the As an amateur, Joseph Nuttall was the 100-
yard champion from 1886 to 1888 and the 220-
Late 19th Century
yard champion from 1886 to 1888. Nuttall later
entered the professional ranks, where he was
It was remarkable that most of the great swim-
recognized as the fastest professional swim-
mers of the 19th century came from the inland
mer of his time. All Nuttall’s amateur records
towns of Lancashire. Their methods revolu-
were exceeded by John Jarvis.
tionized the sport and resulted in a great in-
Jarvis was the 500-yard champion from 1898
crease in speed. For many years, the swimmers
to 1901, the half-mile champion from 1898 to
from the north of England were the fastest in
1901, and the one-mile champion from 1897 to
the world. Much of the success of the Lancashire
1902. He was champion of England and won
swimmers was due to the fact that teachers
championship races in France, Germany, Aus-
with proper credentials were employed to
tria, and Italy, racing against the best-known
watch and guide the younger swimmers, and
and fastest swimmers in these countries and
they carried out their duties in an efficient
beating them in their own waters.
manner, with the results already described.
J.H. Tyers was the 100-yard champion from
In the last 20 years of the 19th century, a
1892 to 1897, the 220-yard champion from 1892
succession of champion swimmers greatly re-
to 1897, the 440-yard champion from 1893 to
duced the times for the various racing dis-
1896, the 500-yard champion from 1893 to 1896,
tances. In the English Championships, the win-
the half-mile champion from 1893 to 1896, and
ning time for the 100-yard race was reduced by
the one-mile champion from 1893 to 1896. J.H.
15 seconds, the time for the 220-yard race was
Derbyshire was the 100-yard champion from
reduced by 35 seconds, the time for the 500-
1898 to 1901 and again in 1903 and 1904.
yard race was reduced by 62 seconds, and the
time for the mile was reduced by 5 minutes.
Competitive Swimming
Particularly notable in this era were the cham-
pions J. Nuttall, J.H. Tyers, J.H. Derbyshire, and in the 20th Century
J.A. Jarvis. These men, in their individual eras,
made a habit of retaining their championship By the mid-20th century, swimming knowl-
titles year after year. edge had spread worldwide, with the result
raeY
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Total records
Figure 11.2 World short-course records, 1991–2000. Graph provided by Nick Thierry.

--- Page 212 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 197
Matthew Webb, Swimming’s First Popular Figure
Captain Matthew Webb was not a competitive swimmer, but he popularized swimming
worldwide when he became the first person to swim the English Channel in 1875. Born at
Irongate in Shropshire, Webb was 27 years old when he swam the Channel. Webb learned
to swim at 7, and when on board the Conway training ship, saved the life of a comrade in
danger of drowning. After leading a seafaring life for some years, he returned to England
able to swim a good breaststroke, but he was not a fast swimmer. When he started for the
Channel swim he was 5 feet 8 inches high, measured 43 inches around the chest, and
weighed about 203 pounds.
that international champions could now be rock pools were built and other areas enclosed
expected to come from almost any country. The to provide safer facilities. With the passage of
rise of countries such as Romania, Yugoslavia, time came the first swimming races and the
France, Brazil, Spain, Mexico, West Germany, eventual forming of clubs and interclub com-
Switzerland, and the Soviet Union showed that petitions.
no one nation owned swimming expertise.
The dominant nations in 20th-century swim- First Swimming Race in Australia
ming were the United States, Australia, Japan,
Hungary, and Holland. Other occasionally suc- The first swimming race in Australia was held
cessful nations were Germany (up to 1939), the in Sydney Harbor (then called Sydney Bay) in
Soviet Union, Great Britain, Denmark, France, the vicinity of Robinson’s Baths alongside the
Sweden, West Germany, and South Africa.* Sydney Domain, in February 1846. The event
Three countries—Australia, the United was won by W. Redman, who swam the 440-
States, and Japan—established a particularly yard race in 8 minutes, 43 seconds.
fine tradition of success in international swim- Bell’s Life in Sydney and Sporting Review (1846)
ming, each rising to pre-eminence at various reported this historic event. The match was
times during the 20th century. Although their open to anyone in the colony, but only six
programs were distinctly different, each coun- swimmers, all subscribers to the local baths,
try contributed to the growing concept of build- competed: W. Redman Jr., Alister Maclean,
ing a nation’s swimming strength through a J. Redman Sr., G. Thornton, a Mr. Green, and a
definite preconceived plan. It is appropriate to Mr. Whitbread. The champion won a silver
examine the contributions made in their time cup, valued at eight pounds, eight shillings,
by each of these three countries. and the privilege of wearing a championship
swimming belt for the next year.
Swimming in Australia At 7:00, the swimmers appeared stripped
and wearing different swimming caps to dis-
From the start of the first European settle- tinguish one from the other. At 7:15, the race
ments, swimming was a popular sport in Aus- began. As described by Bell’s Life in Sydney and
tralia. The warm climate and numerous beaches, Sporting Review, it was a well-swum race, “but
rivers, and waterways naturally attracted especially the contest for the first and second
people to the water for recreation. But few place was most gallant.” Redman Jr., had
knew how to swim and many drowned until anointed himself with oil in preparation for the
swimming instruction became available and event, as the ancient Romans had. Due to the
* East Germany has been excluded from this list because it has been proven in German courts that throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the
Olympic and World Championship successes of East German female swimmers were the result of performance-enhancing drugs
administered by officials in charge of their state-controlled program.

--- Page 213 Text ---
198 Breakthrough Swimming
cold and the rough waters of Sydney Bay, this quickly picked up by one of the boats in atten-
probably gave him an advantage. dance.”
Maclean led for the first 220 yards, followed The final times were 8 minutes, 43 seconds
by Redman Jr., then Redman Sr. As he rounded for Redman Jr. and 8 minutes, 49 seconds for
the southern buoy, Maclean led by about a Maclean, “which, considering the state of the
length, but as they rounded the northern buoy, weather, was very excellent.”
Redman Jr. turned sharply and was able to
close the gap and catch up to Maclean. Redman Early British Influence
Jr. continued to swim strongly and eventually on Swimming in Australia
gained about 10 yards on Maclean, which is
how they finished the race, “the struggle being The early British influence on Australian swim-
most gallantly maintained by Mr. Maclean to ming centers around two key individuals:
the end of the very long distance, upwards of a Charles Steedman and Professor Fred Cavill.
quarter of a mile.” Redman Sr. finished third. Professor Fred Cavill, who emigrated to
Thornton and Green finished together, but early Australia in 1879, is generally credited with
in the race Thornton had taken time to assist being the chief pioneer of Australian swim-
Whitbread, “who suffered from the boisterous ming. But it is little known that an equally
state of the Bay, and was exhausted, but was famous figure in British swimming, Charles
Charles Steedman: Swimming’s First Internationalist
Charles Steedman was born in London, England in 1830 and died in Victoria, Australia in
1901. He was swimming’s first internationalist, champion of England and later champion of
Victoria, Australia. For good measure, he wrote the world’s first text on competitive
swimming, published it in Melbourne, and later published it in London.
Steedman was an internationalist in the true sense of the word. When Steedman was
champion, England was the world’s leading swimming country. He took England’s advanced
knowledge of the sport to Australia and shared it with his new countrymen. Steedman’s
arrival in Australia caused considerable interest. At the age of 24, Steedman was already an
accomplished, knowledgeable, and articulate man who passed on to local enthusiasts
detailed accounts of swimming techniques in his native land. In January 1858, Steedman
competed in the first World Swimming Championship in Captain Kenney’s Ship Baths at St.
Kilda, Melbourne. The race, held over 100 yards, was won by John Bennett of Sydney.
Steedman was not only a top professional swimmer, but almost as soon as he arrived, he
earned a good living as a skilled pianoforte maker. Always seeking to advance himself,
Steedman learned Latin and Greek and became a schoolmaster as well as a journalist.
In 1867, Steedman published A Manual of Swimming, the first important swimming book
of the modern era. Unlike previous texts, Steedman’s book was the first ever written on the
sport of competitive swimming. The practical value of the book was enhanced by the fact
that it was actually written with the authority of experience by one of the great competitive
swimmers of the era. The book was later reprinted in 1873 in Steedman’s native London at
the price of three shillings and sixpence, quite a hefty sum in those days. It is safe to say that
Charles Steedman was the first notable contributor to the development of competitive
swimming as a recognized sport, and his seminal work set the stage for the beginning of
the modern era of swimming later in the 19th century.
In recognition of his contribution to swimming, Charles Steedman was inducted into the
International Swimming Hall of Fame in 2000, nearly 100 years after his death.

--- Page 214 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 199
Steedman (1830–1901), the reigning English after a storm ripped the pool enclosure from its
Champion emigrated to Australia in July 1854. moorings and dashed it on the rocks. He died in
With him, Steedman brought the Champion- 1927 at the age of 88 (Dawson 1987).
ship belt of England as proof of his eminent Professor Cavill’s family were all remark-
status. able swimmers. His sons Charles and Arthur
Steedman settled in Melbourne, then a small (nicknamed Tums) swam across the entrance
provincial town of about 23,000 people. Sydney, to San Francisco Harbor. His youngest son,
on the other hand, was already a bustling city Dick, won 18 Australian and 22 New South
with a population of 100,000, so it is more than Wales titles, and was the first man to break 60
likely that Steedman’s name was not immedi- seconds for 100 yards. His son Percy won the
ately known to the growing number of swim- 440-yard championship and 5-mile champion-
ming enthusiasts in Sydney. However, word ship of the world in 1897. His son Sydney won
eventually leaked out that Steedman, the Cham- the Australian 220-yard championship at the
pion of England, the world’s leading swim- age of 16. Later Sydney was appointed swim-
ming nation at the time, was living in ming coach to the Olympic Club in San Fran-
Melbourne. Not long after, Captain Kenney cisco and with his brother Arthur, helped in-
staged the First World Championship at St. troduce the Australian crawl to America
Kilda, Melbourne, in January 1858 between (Clarkson 1990).
Steedman and John Bennett, Sydney’s leading
swimmer. The race was over 100 yards. Bennett Australia Challenges England
beat the veteran Steedman, who had swum his
first race 15 years earlier in 1843. By the end of the 19th century, J.H. Derbyshire
Professor Fred Cavill (1839–1927) was born had established himself as the fastest swimmer
in London on July 16, 1839, and settled in in the world, having recorded a time of 1 minute,
Sydney in 1879 with his wife, four sons, and 2/5 of a second for the 100 yards. In 1899 after
three daughters. (He later had two more sons.) a three-month sea voyage, Freddie Lane, a wiry
Cavill learned to swim in the Serpentine in young Australian, competed in the English
London at the age of 10, went to sea at 13, 220-yard championship and won, beating
served in the Crimean War and Indian rebel- Derbyshire in 2 minutes, 38-1/5 seconds.
lion, and held silver and bronze medals from In May 1902, Lane was back in England with
the Royal Humane Society and the Australian Dick Cavill and other Australian swimmers.
Humane Society. He first attempted to swim Again they competed against Derbyshire, this
the English Channel in 1876, a feat he practi- time in the 100 yards. Lane beat Derbyshire and
cally accomplished a year later, when he almost Cavill, becoming the first swimmer to cover
swam from France to England on August 20, 100 yards in 1 minute, a new world record.
1877. However, 50 yards from the English shore, Two weeks later, Cavill regained his form to
the boatman following Cavill refused to allow reduce Lane’s record to 58.8 seconds, a record
the boat to go any farther because of the strong that wasn’t recognized because it was recorded
tide flowing to the shore and because of the in a handicap race. Later that year in Leicester,
rocky nature of the coast (Thomas 1904). Lane officially became the first to break 1 minute
On his arrival in Sydney, Cavill built a swim- for the 100 yards, with a time of 59.6 seconds.
ming bath at Rushcutters Bay in Sydney Har- During their English tour, Cavill and Lane each
bor. He later built another pool at Lavender won two national titles: Lane for 100 and 220
Bay, where he guaranteed to teach people to yards, Cavill for 440 and 880 yards. Cavill’s
swim for one guinea. He moved yet again to crawl stroke was completely new to the En-
open an elegant natatorium built on floats in glish experts and captured the admiration of
Farm Cove near the Botanic Gardens, which everyone present. Australian swimming had
became one of the wonders of the town arrived on the world scene. (For further details
(Clarkson 1990). Cavill retired at the age of 70 of Cavill’s stroke, see chapter 1.)

--- Page 215 Text ---
200 Breakthrough Swimming
Australia at the Olympics come known as the Second Golden Age of Aus-
tralian swimming suddenly collapsed, due
Australian swimmers such as Lane, Dick Cavill,
largely to lack of depth. There were to be eight
Barney Kieran, Frank Beaurepaire, and Cecil
lean years before Australian swimming started
Healy and women swimmers Fanny Durack
the long climb back to pre-eminence on the world
and Mona Wylie were the prominent swim-
scene at Sydney (2000) and Fukuoka (2001).
mers from the start of the 20th century to the
The Olympic successes recorded by Austra-
beginning of World War I.
lian swimmers are a remarkable achievement
The 1920s saw Andrew Boy Charlton be-
for a nation with a population of only 17 million.
come an Australian national hero for his fight-
From 1900 to 2000, Australian swimmers have
ing spirit and fine sportsmanship in his famous
won 39 individual Olympic gold medals.
duels with Johnny Weissmuller of the United
States and Arne Borg of Sweden. Charlton won Swimming in America*
the 1,500-meter race in Paris in 1924, thus start-
ing Australia’s long tradition in this event. The Montreal Swimming Association organized
At the 1932 Olympics in Los Angeles, Claire the first competitive swimming meets in North
Dennis won Australia’s only medal when she America in 1876, and the New York Athletic
won the 200-meter breaststroke. For 16 years, Club organized the first meets in the United
Australian swimming went into a slump. In the States one year later. The first municipal swim-
first postwar Olympics in London, 1948, Judy ming pool in the United States was built in
Joy Davies, Nancy Lyons, and John Marshall Brookline, Massachusetts in 1896, but an even
won place medals. After the Olympics, Marshall older pool, the Detroit Natatorium, had existed
went on to Yale University, where he trained since 1816; its dimensions were 16 feet by 33 feet.
under Bob Kiphuth. In 1951, in a never-before- The first YMCA swimming bath in the United
seen spate of record breaking, Marshall broke States was built in Brooklyn, New York in 1885.
every world mark from the 200-meter to the It measured 14 feet by 45 feet. By 1909, when the
1,500-meter freestyle. In 1952 John Davies, a YMCA officially launched its National Swim-
butterfly-breaststroke swimmer and a student ming Campaign, there were 293 pools in
at Michigan University, won the only gold medal YMCAs. Around 1905, a swimming mission-
for Australia in the 200-meter breaststroke. ary named George Corson introduced mass
After training hard for several months in swimming classes throughout eastern North
tropical Queensland, the Australians reestab- America. Corson was a horticulture professor
lished their long-lost supremacy before wildly at the University of Toronto. A showman, pub-
cheering home crowds at the 1956 Melbourne licist, and traveling teacher, Corson is generally
Olympics. They won six individual gold med- credited with increasing the number of swim-
als, several minor placings, and two relay cham- mers throughout the YMCA movement in east-
pionships. Their success was attributed mainly ern North America.
to the pioneering use of interval training and After a late start, American swimming en-
the introduction of radically improved stroke joyed rapid progress from the beginning of the
techniques. (Refer to chapter 1 for more details.) 20th century, mainly because of the elevation of
After any great success, maintaining the mo- the swimming coach’s status from that of bath
mentum can be difficult, especially after the house attendant to that of professional teacher,
Olympics have been staged in one’s own coun- the vast number of competitions, the continual
try with all the accompanying public support. improvement in swimming techniques and
However, to the Australians’ credit, they held a training methods, the institutional backing of
steady individual gold medal count at the next secondary school and university competitions,
four sets of Olympic Games (Rome, Tokyo, and the use of administrative methods of the
Mexico City, and Munich) before what had be- English ASA.
* Parts of this section were contributed by William “Buck” Dawson, First Executive Director, International Swimming Hall of Fame. Used
by permission of Buck Dawson.

--- Page 216 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 201
American Domination won and 37 percent of the gold medals. In the
of World Swimming 32 swimming events, the U.S. team won 33
medals out of a potential 58 medal opportuni-
America’s eventual dominance of world swim- ties (an efficiency rating of 57 percent). The U.S.
ming, highlighted by world records and Olym- women’s team took home 16 medals; the men’s
pic performances (see table 11.1) of such all- team 17. There were only seven events in which
time greats as John Weissmuller, Mark Spitz the U.S. team did not win a single medal: men’s
(seven gold medals at the 1972 Olympics), and 200-meter freestyle (4th), men’s 200-meter
many other illustrious American swimmers, breaststroke (6th), men’s 100-meter butterfly
began hesitantly with world records by (4th), women’s 400-meter individual medley
Schaeffer (1899) and LeMoyne (1903) but really (4th), women’s 100-meter backstroke (6th),
took off with Charles Daniels (1906) and the women’s 200-meter backstroke (5th), and
swimming of Duke Kahanamoku in the 1912 women’s 200-meter freestyle (12th). (Data cour-
Olympics. The United States took charge at the tesy of N. Thierry.)
1920 Olympics and dominated in 1924 and The lessons of American dominance largely
1928 but dipped to second, as the very young have been misunderstood. U.S. success is due to
Japanese swimmers took over in 1932 and 1936. the coaching free market that exists in America.
The United States resurfaced as number one in The United States has the largest body of knowl-
1948 and 1952 but lost to the interval-training edgeable professional swimming coaches in the
and shoulder-rolling Australians in 1956. world, coaches who are highly motivated and
In the 1960s, the United States accumulated dedicated to success. Other nations in the free
80 individual medals at the three Olympic world have missed the importance of this model
Games (Rome 1960, Tokyo 1964, and Mexico and have centralized decision making while
City 1968); other nations claimed the remain- retaining tight control of national programs
ing 61 medals (Thierry 1972). At the Montreal through appointed national coaches.
Olympics in 1976, the U.S. men’s team, under Over the years, through personal contacts
head coach James Counsilman, won 12 of 13 and lecture clinic visits, American swimming
gold medals, the first time in Olympic swim- coaches traveled overseas to make their expe-
ming history that this had been accomplished. rience and expertise available to all countries,
At the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000, the irrespective of their forms of government or
U.S. Olympic team won a total of 97 medals; 38 political affiliations. In particular, for more than
medals were gold. The U.S. swimming team a quarter century the American Swimming
accounted for 34 percent of the total medals Coaches Association (ASCA) has provided
Table 11.1 U.S. Swimming Olympic Medals, 1972–2000
Gold Silver Bronze Total
1972 Munich 17 14 12 43
1976 Montreal 12 14 7 33
1980 Moscow* N/A N/A N/A N/A
1984 Los Angeles 20 12 1 33
1988 Seoul 8 6 4** 18
1992 Barcelona 11 9** 7 27
1996 Atlanta 13 12 2 27
2000 Sydney 14 8 11 33
* The United States did not compete at the 1980 Moscow Games to protest the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
** Additional medals were awarded as the result of ties.
Table provided by Nick Thierry.

--- Page 217 Text ---
202 Breakthrough Swimming
leadership and coaching education in the United States swimming picture was domi-
United States and worldwide by conducting nated by the urban, private-membership ath-
its well-attended annual world swim clinics letic clubs from 1875 to 1940 and by the colleges
and making membership open to coaches from from 1936 to 1960.
all countries. In any given year, about 10 per- High school swimming in the United States
cent of the coaches attending the ASCA Annual became a major development program, as did
World Clinic are not U.S. citizens. Similarly, in the YMCA and the Boys and Girls Clubs of
any given year, foreign membership of ASCA America. More recently, community recreation
numbered about 350 coaches, mainly from swim clubs have played a big part in America’s
Europe and undeveloped countries. learn-to-swim program, which continues
through to the structured high school and col-
United States lege programs and ultimately to USA Swim-
Swimming Programs ming (formerly AAU), the FINA-recognized
governing body of American senior swim-
American competitive swimming was domi- ming.
nated first by the East Coast, then by Chicago Americans also originated age-group swim-
and the Midwest, and finally by California. The ming, an exposure and developmental pro-
Hawaiian influence was strong from 1911 to gram begun in the 1950s through Carl Bauer at
1956. There is no longer one area that dominates the Missouri Athletic Club in St. Louis and
United States swimming, however. Good coach- developed by Beth Kaufman in California. The
ing has spread nationwide and good programs impact of United States age-group swimming
spring up wherever good coaching exists. was so great in the 1960s that swimming be-
Similarly, United States collegiate swimming, came a kindergarten sport, with world-record
which started with a Yale, Pennsylvania, and holders as young as 12 years old and Olympic
Columbia meet in 1896, went through a long champions in their teens.
period—1924 to 1958—during which six uni- The development of age-group swimming
versities dominated the scene: Navy, North- was the biggest single factor in the tremendous
western, Rutgers, Michigan, Ohio State, and growth of American swimming in the post–
Yale. It is now becoming more balanced after World War II years. Peter Daland, coach of the
recent dominance by Sunbelt schools. The total University of Southern California and one of
Charlotte “Eppy” Epstein (1885–1938)
Charlotte “Eppy” Epstein, the mother of American women’s swimming, established women’s
swimming as a recognized sport in the United States and was responsible for its inclusion
at the 1920 Antwerp Olympic Games. During her 22 years with the New York Women’s
Swimming Association (NYWSA), the club’s swimmers set 51 world records and registered
31 National (USA) Champion relay teams. Within months of the NYWSA’s establishment,
Eppy persuaded the Amateur Athletic Union to permit women swimmers to register as
athletes with the AAU for the first time.
By profession a court stenographer, Epstein led the United States lady swimmers to the
1920, 1924, and 1932 Olympiads. During this time, American female swimmers dominated
the Games, and those considered her proteges were champions: Claire Galligan, Gertrude
Ederle, Aileen Riggen, Helen Wainwright, and Eleanor Holm.
When Epstein was named assistant manager of the 1932 U.S. Women’s Olympic Swim
Team, she became the first woman to be appointed to such a position. Four years later, she
was invited to coach the 1936 U.S. Women’s Olympic Team in Berlin but declined and
resigned from the U.S. Olympic Committee in protest against Nazi Germany’s policies.

--- Page 218 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 203
the prime movers in American swimming dur- American University Swimming
ing the second half of the 20th century, told me
that the first result of the new program showed As the age-group youngsters grew up, an in-
up at the Melbourne Olympic Games in 1956, flux of swimmers entered American university
when Sylvia Ruuska, an age-group product, swimming programs. It was not long before
won the bronze medal in the 400-meter university swimming benefited from the dy-
freestyle. namic age-group program that had taken shape
According to Daland, the first results of real beneath it. Soon, many hard-working former
depth from the new age-group program were age-group swimmers were participating in the
at the Rome Olympics in 1960. The United college ranks, causing a revolution in the size of
States had seen a great upsurge of swimming, college teams, the size of competitions, and the
particularly in California. Daland coached at number of good swimmers.
the University of Southern California, and at Athletic scholarships were offered to induce
the Los Angeles Athletic Club (with co-coach swimmers to compete while pursuing their
Don Gambril), while George Haines at Santa degrees. According to Daland (1984), athletic
Clara, developed the most successful home- scholarships existed for 50 to 60 years but be-
spun team of all time. came more numerous in the 1950s and 1960s. In
The Santa Clara swim club, coached by the mid-1970s, however, the financial crisis
George Haines, achieved the remarkable tally that developed in American colleges caused
of 43 national titles, 55 Olympians, and 51 severe cutbacks. The National Collegiate Ath-
Olympic medals (33 gold, 11 silver, and 7 letic Association (NCAA) removed 40 percent
bronze)—an achievement rivaled only by coach of the aid in nonrevenue sports. However, there
Mark Schubert during his 13-year tenure at always has been a high percentage of
Mission Viejo, California, where Schubert’s nonscholarship swimmers in American uni-
swimmers won 44 national titles. versities—a majority, in fact.
During the years 1957 to 1959, a number of Collegiate swimming programs for women
age-groupers began to break world records. really grew when the federal government
The age-group program spread across the passed Title IX, which mandated all programs
United States, causing a great influx of young in schools, colleges, or universities that receive
swimmers. The large increase in numbers funds from the federal government have equal
was not without attendant difficulties, par- opportunity for women. Before Title IX, female
ticularly in administration and coaching swimmers tended to drop out of the sport
development. The swimming population of earlier than male swimmers. But increased
America multiplied about ten-fold between opportunities in athletic programs provide a
1956 and 1964. What had been small meets strong incentive for women to remain longer in
became huge meets. For example, in southern the sport.
California, a senior meet that at one time had In the years since Title IX was passed, how-
1 heat, sometimes 2, but rarely 3, soon came to ever, the face of American college campuses
have 10 or 12 heats, even with set-qualifying has changed. Nationwide, there are now more
times. female undergraduate students than male; on
Although Carl Bauer, Beth Kaufman, Peter some campuses, the difference can be as much
Daland, and Dave Beaver are generally ac- as 55 percent to 45 percent female to male
knowledged as the pioneers of the age-group population. Because one of the goals of Title IX
movement, its expansion largely resulted from was to make participation and scholarship lev-
development by the local swimming commit- els approximate the relative percentages in the
tees in Sunbelt states such as Texas, Florida, student population, athletic administrators
and California. It was promoted mainly by age- have felt increasing pressure to cut programs
group parents, upper-middle class people who and scholarships for male student-athletes to
had taken over the leadership role in swim- comply with Title IX. Since big-ticket men’s
ming administration. sports such as football require many of the

--- Page 219 Text ---
204 Breakthrough Swimming
resources available (a typical Division I foot- 74 percent of the coaches certified were level 3
ball program is allowed 85 scholarships, plus or higher. By 1987, this percentage had dropped
walk-ons), it has become exceedingly difficult to 39 percent, and in 1988 and 1989, over 80
to maintain balance between men’s and percent of the coaches certified were at levels 1
women’s athletic programs without dropping and 2. In 1999, the percentages were 64 percent
some of the less visible men’s programs, such at levels 1 and 2, 21 percent at level 3, 9 percent
as swimming. at level 4, and 6 percent at level 5.
Although Title IX has caused great problems This indicates that the program has received
for male swimming programs at the collegiate considerable acceptance by the coaching com-
level, it has provided huge opportunities on the munity. The ASCA certification program was
women’s side. This has contributed to the de- accepted by every organized coaching group in
velopment of the dominant U.S. women’s swim- the United States, beginning with National In-
ming program. The ratio of female to male terscholastic Coaches Association (NISCA) and
swimmers overall in USA Swimming is 60 per- followed by masters coaches, YMCA coaches,
cent to 40 percent. Within a few years, two- and college coaches’ associations.
thirds of American swimmers registered with
USA Swimming could be female. This is indi-
The Golden Era of Japanese
rectly related to Title IX; parents put their kids
Swimming
in sports that they perceive provide the greatest
opportunities.
The current federal administration is likely Swimming has been an organized sport in Japa-
to reexamine the way Title IX is administered. nese schools since 1603. Japanese interschool
This may or may not impact male swimming competitive swimming programs have contin-
programs. Several legislators, including Con- ued to the present time (Oppenheim 1970).
gressman Dennis Hastert (R-Illinois), a former From 1932 to 1936, Japan reigned supreme in
wrestling coach, are leading the charge to make world swimming, but after World War II—
compliance to Title IX live up to the word of the with the exception of great swimmers such as
legislation, changing the way it has been ap- Furuhashi, Hashizume, Yamanaka, Taguchi,
plied to provide more opportunities for women Tanaka, Suzuki, and a few others—Japan never
without sacrificing opportunities for men regained its former depth in world swimming.
(Neuburger 2001). The dramatic rise of the Japanese to world
supremacy at the Los Angeles Olympics in
The Professional Development 1932 marked the first occasion that a single
country had put into effect a definite national
of American Swimming Coaches*
plan with the aim of achieving complete mas-
Begun in 1985, the American Swimming tery. It also was the first time that the motion
Coaches Association certification program is a picture camera was used as a scientific device
voluntary system designed to identify profes- for improving swimming technique on a na-
sionally prepared swimming coaches. By Janu- tional scale. The Japanese made extensive mo-
ary of 2000, 6,050 coaches had applied for cer- tion film studies of leading American and Eu-
tification and over 5,200 had been granted ropean champions from above and below water.
certification. The films were then shown to schoolchildren
The program grew steadily, with the upper- throughout Japan to give them a visual idea of
level coaches (3, 4, and 5) generally coming into good technique.
the program first, as might be expected, fol- These children were carefully nurtured in
lowed by the newer coaches in subsequent sound stroke technique from an early age. The
years. The statistics are revealing. In 1985, over American crawl was cleverly adapted to the
*“The Professional Development of American Swimming Coaches” was contributed by John Leonard, Executive Director, American
Swimming Coaches Association. Used by permission of John Leonard.

--- Page 220 Text ---
Evolution of Competitive Swimming 205
shorter Japanese physique, but the Japanese leadership. Assisting these professionals were
crawl, as it came to be called, was not fundamen- lay volunteers, prominent people in commerce,
tally different from the American style. The Japa- industry, and other professions. In more ad-
nese youngsters were taught well from an early vanced countries, the better-organized lay vol-
age, and they trained harder than swimmers had unteers contributed their expertise and guid-
ever done before. Good technique and strenuous ance, supplanting the old part-time amateur
training were consistently applied. The results hobbyist. In a sense, swimming administration
of this first conscientious application of a na- was taken off the kitchen table and put into the
tional development plan were outstanding. board room.
In the Amsterdam Olympics in 1928, the breast- In some countries, competitive swimming,
stroke swimmer Tsuruta was the only Japanese like all sports, was organized and centrally
to win a title. His success inspired all of Japan. controlled by the state. Elsewhere, governments
Four years later, Japan brought a team of young directly involved in funding national programs
teenagers to the 1932 Los Angeles Olympic Games tried to give an impression of remaining at
and shook the world of swimming, winning arm’s length, but often it was apparent that
every event but the 400 meters, which was won whoever paid the piper called the tune.
by Clarence “Buster” Crabbe, an American.
The American team coach, Bob Kiphuth, The Need for Motivators
was reportedly pleased by the fact that in prac-
and Innovators
tice, the 1932 American Olympic team had
beaten the 800-meter relay record by over 15
Many beginning coaches, unsure of what infor-
seconds. This improvement was not enough to
mation to accept and what to discard, really
beat the Japanese team, which eclipsed the old
didn’t know how to start coaching. They came
relay record by more than 37 seconds to estab-
to expect more from science than science could
lish an undreamed-of mark (Cureton 1934). In
provide. In the late 20th century, young coaches
all, the Japanese accumulated 86 points, while
had grown up in the sport expecting that sci-
the Americans earned 33. Japanese swimmers
ence would supply them with all the answers
won first and second in every race but one; in
instead of trying to become more competent
that race they placed third, fourth, and fifth.
and self-sufficient by testing new ideas as part
These results showed a Japanese team of un-
of their daily practical coaching.
usual mass strength (Cureton 1934).
As competitive swimming entered the 21st
An amazing feature of the great Japanese
century, some penetrating questions were be-
rise to victory was that it happened without
ing asked. Had modern coaches been caught
warning between the Games of 1928 and 1932.
between two approaches, the pool-deck em-
The Japanese success in the 1930s was the first
pirical and the scientific? Had modern coaches
example in competitive swimming of what can
lost the ability to innovate? Did young coaches
be achieved by careful planning and special-
in particular rely too much on scientific re-
ized training that works purposefully rather
search papers and not enough on developing
than hopefully toward a set goal. They didn’t
an ability to innovate?
know it at the time, but the Japanese developed
A trust in science does not imply the aban-
what would prove to be a basic recipe for
donment of hunch and intuition. On the con-
national success in international sport.
trary, the history of science itself is studded
with cases of important discoveries made
The Development of
through chance, hunch, serendipity—even
Multilevel National Programs dreams. Most coaches who use their hunches
well also seem to possess a high level of knowl-
Growth of the sport and the desire to excel led edge and understanding about their activities.
to the development of multilevel national pro- So, the question is not when to apply science
grams and the employment of professional and when to rely on intuition but rather how to
administrators, often university trained in sport combine the two effectively.

--- Page 221 Text ---
206 Breakthrough Swimming
William Wilson, Swimming’s First Innovator
William Wilson was an important swimming pioneer, a skilled and lucid writer, a visionary,
and an innovator. He was born in London on November 13, 1844, to Scottish parents and
moved to Glasgow when he was a child. Had he been born 100 years later, there’s little doubt
that his thinking would still have been in the vanguard of swimming progress.
Wilson stressed the need for scientific study of swimming, holding that a successful
swimming teacher ought to devote as much thought, application, hard work, and constant
practice as instructors did in almost any branch of education or science. Wilson was a
swimmer, a swimming instructor, and the sport’s first regular newspaper journalist. He
studied the sport carefully and concluded that swimming had undergone very little
improvement “during its many years’ practice.” With great foresight, he announced that
humans should be able to use their superior intellect to move through water at a much faster
rate than they had so far attained.
Wilson had many firsts. He was the first to describe and illustrate the racing start and turn,
the first in the literature to advocate an overarm recovery for the sidestroke, and the first to
develop a life-saving drill. He created the idea of water polo. He pioneered land- and water-
training methods. With the early shortage of swimming pools, he promoted year-round cold-
water swimming in the sea.
In 1883, Wilson published The Swimming Instructor, one of the 19th century’s three
landmark books on swimming. Along with Charles Steedman’s A Manual of Swimming,
Wilson’s work was considered a great advance on the literature of the time. Wilson, far ahead
of his time, said that there was a need to invent and introduce some method, or methods,
whereby the body would move through water faster than the present rate.
Wilson thought it was necessary to acknowledge our helplessness regarding swimming
and consider how best to improve the present state of the art. His references to resistance
versus propulsion, made nearly 120 years ago, still form the fundamental basis on which
present-day discussions on stroke mechanics evolve. (Several times Wilson mentioned
momentum, an aspect of human swimming propulsion that remains a much-neglected
study.)

--- Page 222 Text ---
Chapter 12
Doping, Testing,
and Modern Efforts
to Gain an Edge
For most of 20 years, powerful East Ger-
man females ruled women’s swimming.
Though suspected of taking performance-
enhancing drugs and despite drug testing
at the Olympics, not one positive result was
recorded during these years.
The truth emerged after the fall of the
East German state in 1989. Starting in the
1970s, the officials of the German Demo-
cratic Republic’s elite state-controlled sports
schools routinely gave performance-
enhancing drugs to swimmers under the
pretense that they were merely taking vita-
mins. In reality, they were ingesting the
now notorious little blue pills (oral
turinabol), a powerful performance-
enhancing drug capable of producing dam-
aging side effects.
Although athletes from West Germany,
the United States, and Canada also used
drugs, they did so of their own volition.
What was specifically different about drug
cheating in East Germany was that it was
a state-ordered policy aimed at improving
athletic performance with drugs (State Plan
14.25 of 1974), forged by a group of offi-
cials and doctors, including Dr. Ewald and
Dr. Hoeppner, and implemented on a large
scale. This fact, in itself, ensured that the
plan was highly researched, controlled,
and specialized.
207

--- Page 223 Text ---
208 Breakthrough Swimming
Never before in the history of sport had The East German Doping
such a depraved, cynical, and shameful act
Regime
been systematically perpetrated on young-
sters entrusted to the care of adults. At the
The last decade of the 20th century produced
bottom of it were qualified medical doctors,
incontrovertible proof of drug cheating by ath-
who had taken a professional oath to practice
letes under the East German regime. The dis-
medicine and cause no intentional harm to
covery of secret police (Stasi) files confirmed
those in their care.
that thousands of athletes, including swim-
Only after the East German state ceased to mers, were involved in systematic state-con-
exist did the world learn that the long-held trolled cheating between 1972 and 1989. The
suspicions were true. The doping trials that German Democratic Republic’s much vaunted
began in Berlin in March 1998 revealed that the scientific sports program was spearheaded by
former East German sporting regime, under doped female swimmers who swept the boards
State Plan 14.25 of 1974, had made it a state in Olympic, World, and European Champion-
policy to improve athletic performance through ships. The Stasi files also revealed that Russia
performance-enhancing drugs. There was no was involved in state-controlled doping in sport,
out-of-competition testing at that time, but as were most of the Eastern Bloc countries.
when the story of the cheating East German Most of the athletes given the drugs were
regime finally emerged, it was understood that under the age of 16 (some were as young as 10),
East German swimmers had either been given and they had no idea what they were given.
diuretic-masking agents before the Games Younger athletes were not informed about the
started or that the steroids had naturally passed drugs or their consequences and were usually
through their systems long before they came to kept away from their parents to avoid the dis-
the Olympics. The great coach-educators of the covery of this interference with their children’s
early 20th century could never have foreseen well-being. Athletes over 18 had to sign an oath
how their concepts of good sportsmanship and of secrecy.
fair play would be trampled on in the interests The indelible fact is that for 20 years the
of political ideology. performances of the East German swimmers
By taking anabolic steroids to increase muscle resulted from the ingestion of performance-
mass and strength, an athlete can undertake enhancing drugs, administered covertly by the
much higher levels of work than normally pos- officers of the state. For 20 years FINA, the
sible; of course, doing so starkly contrasts the international governing body of swimming,
old ideal of striving for success through honest failed to catch the East Germans, who were
effort. East Germany and other totalitarian experts at pretesting their athletes to ensure
countries, with their cold, impersonal, state that they were clear before allowing them to
systems of sport preparation, had no such tra- compete. Out-of-competition testing was non-
ditions. For two decades, East German officials existent at that time, and since testing was
insisted they were winning fairly because of a conducted only during competitions, not one
superior system, but, in fact, they had not the East German tested positive.
slightest compunction about administering
The world records set by East German swim-
performance-enhancing drugs to athletes with-
mers were allowed to remain in the FINA record
out the athletes’ knowledge.
books, and the athletes still have their Olympic
medals. Neither FINA nor the IOC have seen fit
to retroactively award medals and other honors
I will abstain from all intentional wrongdoing to those dispossessed of what is rightfully theirs.
and harm, especially from abusing the bodies A large section of the swimming world, particu-
larly those who still cherish achievement by
of man or woman.
honest effort, still carry considerable resentment
From the Hippocratic Oath that these injustices have yet to be set right.

--- Page 224 Text ---
Doping, Testing, and Modern Efforts to Gain an Edge 209
At the 2000 Olympics, the German Olympic A special division of the criminal police, the
Committee’s media guide book included the Central Investigations Office for Government
results of GDR swimmers as part of Germany’s and Reunification Crimes (ZERV), was charged
Olympic history. This was done despite the fact with investigating doping crimes. Charges
that their judicial system prosecuted the former ranged from bodily harm to assisting in bodily
GDR officials responsible for state-sponsored harm, and in the complicated amalgamation of
cheating. Eastern and West law, courts were obliged to
operate with the milder form of punishment
East German Doping Trials* (East or West accordingly). The Dynamo trial
saw a great deal of denial, and sometimes
The historic East German doping trials began
refusal, by former athletes to denounce their
in March 1998, nearly nine years after the fall of
coaches and their personal achievements by
the Berlin Wall, with the so-called “pilot trial”
admitting to doping. As the top East German
of doctors and swimming coaches from the
officials came to trial, more victims came for-
former SC Dynamo Club (East Berlin). This
ward to testify, and at this point, they stopped
was the first of a series of trials that would last
being pariahs and found a greater degree of
until October 2, 2000, the statute of limitations.
support from their respective communities.
It is difficult to determine if they would ever
have taken place without the relentless efforts Effects of Doping on Athletes
of a Heidelberg molecular biologist Professor
Dr. Werner Franke and his wife, Brigitte Women like Birgit Matz and Carola Beraktchjan,
Berendonk. The first to uncover and publish former swimmers for Berlin’s Dynamo Club,
much of the East German doping history, they testified against their coaches in 1998. Both
also provided valuable documentation and have permanently deepened voices, and Matz
support to investigating and prosecuting au- has noticeable facial hair.
thorities, not to mention former athletes who Rica Reinisch, a triple Olympic champion in
had been doped. 1980, has had five miscarriages and suffers
* Reprinted by permission of Karin Helmstaedt, a freelance journalist and author who followed the doping trials in Berlin. Reprinted
by permission of Swimnews, July 2000.
Chronology of German Doping Trials and Verdicts
March 18, 1998. First trial of systematic doping in the former East Germany opens. Four
swimming coaches and two doctors from Berlin’s Dynamo Club are accused of bodily harm
for distributing anabolic steroids to underage female swimmers.
August 18, 1998. Second trial of doping perpetrators opens in Berlin. Three swimming
coaches from Berlin’s TSC club—Klaus Klemenz, Peter Mattonet, and Bernd Christochowitz—
and two doctors—Dr. Dorit Rösler and Dr. Ulrich Sünder—are charged with bodily harm.
August 24, 1998. TSC trial ends with all five defendants found guilty of bodily harm. Fines
range from 7,000 to 27,000 DM (approximately $3,200 to $12,500 U.S.).
August 31, 1998. First verdicts handed down in the Dynamo trial. Former Olympic
swimming coach Rolf Gläser confesses to charges and is fined 7,200 DM (approximately
$3,300). Dr. Dieter Binus also confesses and is fined 9,000 DM (approximately $4,100).
(continued)

--- Page 225 Text ---
210 Breakthrough Swimming
(continued)
September 14, 1998. Former Dynamo swim coach Volker Frischke is fined 5,000 DM
(approximately $2,300). Shortly afterward, his colleague Dieter Lindemann, former coach of
world record-holder Franziska van Almsick, gets off with 4,000 DM (approximately $1,800).
Dieter Krause is fined 3,000 DM (approximately $1,400).
December 7, 1998. After 42 days of proceedings, a final verdict is handed down in the
Dynamo trial. Dr. Bernd Pansold is fined 14,400 DM (approximately $6,700). His appeal is
denied.
April 12, 1999. Dietrich Hannemann, former director of East Germany’s Sports Medicine
Services, receives a fine of 45,000 DM (approximately $20,900).
June 21, 1999. The first suspended prison sentence is handed down to a former doper. Dr.
Dietbert Freiberg from Sports Medicine Services is given a six-month suspended sentence.
October 22, 1999. Horst Röder, former vice president of the East German Sports and
Gymnastics Union (DTSB), gets a one-year suspended sentence.
November 1999. Uwe Neumann, former coach of triple Olympic champion Rica Reinisch,
is fined 8,000 DM in Dresden (approximately $3,700).
December 22, 1999. Egon Müller, former general secretary of East Germany’s swimming
federation, and Wolfgang Richter and Jürgen Tanneberger, former men’s and women’s
national team coaches, receive one-year suspended sentences and fines of 5,000 DM
(approximately $2,300).
January 12, 2000. Dr. Lothar Kipke, 72, former Swimming Federation doctor, receives a
suspended sentence of one year and three months, plus a fine of 7,500 DM (approximately
$3,400), the heaviest sentence at this point.
March 26, 2000. Sport doctor Jochen Neubauer from Potsdam is fined 9,000 DM
(approximately $4,100) and dismissed from his position as a physician at Potsdam’s Olympic
Training Centre, though he still has his position as team doctor for Tennis Borussia Football.
April 11, 2000. In the state of Thüringia, prosecutors wrap up all doping-related cases. Five
doctors and one coach are fined 2,500 to 11,700 DM (approximately $1,100 to $5,400). Fifty-
three investigations are officially closed. Also in April, swimming coach Bernd Henneberg
is fined 5,000 DM (approximately $2,300) for his doping activities in the city of Halle.
April 13, 2000. In Leipzig court, Stefan Hetzer, former coach of East Germany’s most
successful swimmer ever, six-time Olympic gold medallist Kristin Otto, is charged with bodily
harm and is fined 15,000 DM (approximately $7,000) after he admits to doping Otto and eight
other swimmers.
July 18, 2000. Most significant doping trial comes to an end in Berlin. Manfred Ewald,
former president of the DTSB and leader of the country’s medals-at-any-price policy, is
given a 22-month suspended jail term. Dr. Manfred Hoeppner, the doctor in charge of
overseeing the system, gets 18 months, also suspended. Both are convicted of contributing
to bodily harm in 20 cases through their leading roles in the doping system.
July 25, 2000. Council for Manfred Ewald announces it will appeal the Berlin court’s
decision to Germany’s Federal Court of Justice in Leipzig. Victims’ lawyer Michael Lehner
will also appeal both senior officials’ sentences.
Reprinted by permission of Karin Helmstaedt, a freelance journalist and author who followed the doping trials in Berlin, and by permission of Swimnews,
July 2000.

--- Page 226 Text ---
Doping, Testing, and Modern Efforts to Gain an Edge 211
from recurring ovarian cysts. Catherine Although the sudden upsurge in Chinese
Menschner, who received male hormones from swimming was reminiscent of the 20 years of
the age of 10, suffers from permanent damage drug cheating by the former East German
to her spine and reproductive organs. regime, some fair-minded people initially
Jutta Gottschalk, a former swimmer from wanted to give the Chinese the benefit of the
Magdeburg, gave birth to a daughter who is doubt. In the first edition of this book, I com-
blind in one eye. Her teammate Martina mented
Gottschalt has a 15-year old son who was born
Chinese swimmers, competing in their
with severe club feet.
first Olympics at Seoul, reached several
Shot and discus throwers Brigitte Michel
finals and served notice that China could
and Birgit Boese both had great difficulties
well achieve a rapid rise to world promi-
conceiving; as a young woman wanting to get
nence even before the end of the 20th
pregnant, Michel was told by a gynecologist
century (Colwin 1992, p. 182).
she would have to give up sport because her
reproductive organs were like those of a 10-
But no one could have guessed that in 1991,
year-old girl.
at the World Swimming Championships in
Perhaps the most grotesque story of all came
Perth, the Chinese swimmers would come away
from Andreas Krieger, formerly European
with six medals—four gold, one silver, and one
champion shot-putter Heidi Krieger. She was
bronze—and that at the 1994 World Champi-
so physically changed by the drugs she re-
onships in Rome, the Chinese women would
ceived that she finally underwent a sex change
astound the world by winning 12 of the 16 gold
in 1997, suffering great emotional trauma and
medals at stake, setting five world records in
contemplating suicide along the way.
the process (see table 12.1).
Not only because the Chinese girls came
The Chinese Doping Problem from nowhere to sweep these events, but also
their incredible muscularity and other typical
In 1992, as if from nowhere, the number of signs of steroid abuse caused immediate suspi-
Chinese swimmers ranked in the top 25 world cion among experienced coaches from several
rankings soared from a plateau of less than 30 countries, having the memory of 20 years of
to 98. Furthermore, all but 4 of the 98 swimmers East German cheating still fresh in their minds.
were female, and their improvement rate was Moreover, several world-renowned endocri-
much greater than could be expected as a result nologists concluded that Chinese female swim-
of normal growth and development. mers had been subjected to testosterone medi-
This huge change led to a growing suspi- cation. Throughout the meet, simmering
cion that Chinese swimmers were being doped. resentment grew to downright anger that
Table 12.1 Chinese Olympic and World Swimming Medals, 1988–2000
Gold Silver Bronze Total
1988 Seoul Olympic Games 0 3 1 4
1991 Perth World Championships 4 1 1 6
1992 Barcelona Olympic Games 4 5 0 9
1994 Rome World Championships 12 6 1 19
1996 Atlanta Olympic Games 1 3 2 6
1998 Perth World Championships 3 2 2 7
2000 Sydney Olympic Games 0 0 0 0
Data courtesy of Nick Thierry.

--- Page 227 Text ---
212 Breakthrough Swimming
reached a flash point on the final day of the and their tests proved positive. At this point,
championships. Dave Johnson, the Canadian the number of Chinese positive tests had
head coach, called a news conference at which reached a total of 11. The drug detected in
he produced a petition signed by representa- Hiroshima was a relatively new and very
tives from 18 countries urging FINA to intro- powerful dehydrotestosterone (DHT), first
duce a more rigorous program of drug testing. seen in the pharmacopoeia in 1991 and 1992.
While the petition did not refer specifically The new DHT combined with any kind of
to China, there was no mistaking the terse base and thus could be used as a massage
message it contained: the apparent reemer- cream that was quickly absorbed through the
gence of the extensive use of performance- skin.
enhancing drugs, especially in women’s com- In the wake of this startling news, the China
petition, constitutes the single greatest threat to Swimming Association (CSA) could not, or
the progress and integrity of the sport. would not, give any explanation of the large
Subsequent events proved that the Chinese number of positive tests accumulated by their
girls used a very sophisticated skin-applied swimmers, who, at the time, were far more
(topical) testosterone derivative. But the Chi- than the rest of the world put together.
nese continued to maintain that their dramatic
improvement resulted from traditional Chi- First FINA Delegation to China,
nese medicine and the use of various Chinese March 2–6, 1995
herbs. They insisted that their swimmers were
girls of strong peasant stock who descended On February 15, 1995, FINA appointed a del-
from people accustomed to hard work, harder egation to visit China to investigate the back-
than any Westerner could ever have done, and ground behind the many positive drug tests in
this was why they were so successful. Western 1994.
coaches were accused of being racist and jeal- During this first meeting with the Chinese,
ous of Chinese success. Gunner Werner, secretary of FINA, to his credit,
After the sudden, unbelievable performances told the Chinese that 11 positive tests in 1994
of Chinese swimmers at the 1994 World Cham- was an unacceptably high number from any
pionships in Rome, the world of swimming one country and that the purpose of the FINA
was in turmoil. After 20 years of undetected visit was to investigate the background to these
East German doping, FINA’s ability to identify events.
and punish major drug offenders came to be Without going into all the specifics of the
strongly questioned, particularly among the copious FINA reports, certain distinct conclu-
major swimming nations. The thought of the sions resulted from the FINA investigation:
sport enduring another long period of uninter-
• Whereas the East German motivation for
rupted drug cheating caused a great deal of
cheating had been to boost the so-called
anger. A call went out to FINA to deal deci-
benefits of their political system, it would
sively with this new and very obvious drug
seem that money was the main motiva-
threat to the sport.
tion for Chinese swimmers and their
Despite the dissimulating and evasive state-
coaches to cheat.
ments made by prominent Chinese coaches,
• CSA had suspended several coaches from
the early suspicions about the Chinese swim-
domestic and international competition
ming team were confirmed at the Asian Games
because of positive tests found in their
in Hiroshima, October 1994, when seven Chi-
swimmers.
nese swimmers—including Yang Aihua and
Lu Binn, the world champions from the Rome • The FINA delegation was unable to find
World Championships earlier that same proof of systematic doping.
year—were tested soon after stepping off their • The CSA promised to institute a number
plane. Caught by surprise, they had no time to of measures and reforms, including out-
use diuretics to mask the presence of steroids, of-competition doping tests.

--- Page 228 Text ---
Doping, Testing, and Modern Efforts to Gain an Edge 213
Second FINA Delegation to China, Third FINA Delegation to China,
February 1998 December 1–4, 1999
On January 8, 1998, a few days before the start FINA’s third visit to China was held in Shang-
of the World Championships in Perth, West hai to meet with members of the Shanghai
Australia, customs officers at the Sydney air- Swimming Association as well as the CSA.
port discovered human growth hormone (HGH) On the positive side, more funding had
in the baggage of Chinese swimmer Yuan Yuan, ensured a great increase in the number of out-
placed there by her coach Zhou Zhewen. of-competition tests. As promised, CSA con-
Six days later, it was announced that tests in ducted exactly 600 tests in 1998 (162 in compe-
Perth showed the presence of the diuretic-mask- tition, 15 at the FINA World Cup, and 423 out
ing agent triamterine—a banned substance— of competition), with 4 positive (3 for DHT, 1
in the urine samples of four Chinese swim- for testosterone/epitestosterone ratio). Each
mers, Wang Luna, Yi Zhang, Huijue Cai, and of the four swimmers who tested positive was
Wei Wang. (The swimmers were later each suspended for four years, the FINA minimum.
suspended from competition for two years, For the first 10 months of 1999, 646 tests were
while three coaches associated with the swim- conducted (217 in competition, 429 out of com-
mers— Zhi Cheng, Hiuqin Xu, and Zhi Cheng— petition), with no positives.
were each suspended for three months.) In its Eleven Points Declaration, the CSA
The world of swimming could not have imag- assured FINA that it would ban for life any
ined the vast media coverage resulting from swimmer violating the rules against the use of
these discoveries. The Australian media, from steroids or similar substances. But it had not
the most conservative to the tabloids, ran page been able to do so, saying that it was difficult
after page on the developing story, usually on dealing with other groups, including coaches
the front page and several inside pages as well. and public officials, who opposed a life ban.
In Europe and much of Asia, the story was However, the CSA seemed to have been work-
featured in big metropolitan newspapers. To ing with state authorities regarding criminal
the dismay of the organizers, the World Cham- penalties for doping but without result.
pionships in Perth were becoming a fiasco even
Disappointing Progress
before the meet started. Never before had com-
petitive swimming received so much public- One of the main reasons for the FINA
ity—most of it adverse. Following the world- delegation’s second visit to Beijing (February
wide media uproar, and concerned about the 1998) had been to hear and discuss the CSA’s
discovery of HGH at the Sydney airport, FINA report on the incident at the Sydney airport
immediately announced that they would send before the 1998 World Championships. The
a second delegation to China to examine and third FINA delegation found the progress made
study measures to eliminate doping. by CSA since its second visit disappointing.
A FINA delegation arrived in China the fol- The only attempt at investigating the incident
lowing month on February 16, 1998, and met had been the interrogation of the principals,
with leading officials of the CSA, including the who continued to deny knowledge of any
swimmers who had tested positive and their wrongdoing.
coaches. At the meeting, the CSA made a reas- Educational sessions had been held in
suring Eleven Points Declaration outlining in Baoding (May 1998) and in Daqing (April 1999),
detail how it proposed to tackle the doping at the time of the national championships in
problem in Chinese swimming. The main points those cities, to discuss antidoping issues with
centered on increased testing, severe punish- swimmers, coaches, and team leaders, and
ment for swimmers and coaches, improved translations of FINA’s latest doping rules had
antidoping regulations, registration of swim- been distributed by the CSA to all clubs.
mers, limitation of cash awards, and several The CSA had registered by computer all its
other positive steps. approximately 1,200 elite swimmers, and the

--- Page 229 Text ---
214 Breakthrough Swimming
swimmers had signed a Letter of Guarantee registered the bulk of the grass-roots and open
pledging to follow the doping rules. Registered group level swimmers.
swimmers were to receive ID cards to assist CSA was trying to develop a national regis-
their identification by FINA’s sampling agents. tration system to cover all new swimmers de-
The CSA advised the delegation that it was veloped in China and stated that it would
testing blood drawn from swimmers, not to employ a full-time person responsible for dop-
determine the presence of banned substances, ing control. This person would communicate
but to see whether blood doping was occurring. results and ensure that accurate identities of
The CSA’s promise that coaches of swim- swimmers in the top 50 lists be communicated
mers who test positive will be severely sanc- to the FINA office in Lausanne.
tioned seems to have been adhered to. The
The Shanghai Swimming Association
coach of the three swimmers who tested posi-
tive for DHT in November 1998 was suspended The SSA has about 30,000 swimmers, many of
for four years and fined Y10,000, while the whom are novices or just learning to swim. The
coach of the four swimmers who tested posi- better age-group swimmers number about
tive for a diuretic in Perth, January 1998, was 3,200, of whom it was estimated only 60 to 100
suspended from coaching for eight years. are registered. While the SSA seems to do the
In addition, Chinese labor authorities prohib- same kind of education and dissemination of
ited the total withholding of prize money until antidoping information that the CSA does, it
after retirement. As a result, CSA now pays one- does not conduct out-of-competition testing.
fifth of all prize money won to the swimmer During FINA’s third visit to China, SSA rep-
within a year of competition and the remainder resentatives appeared exceedingly naive. They
after four years but only if no doping offenses seemed quick to accept excuses by swimmers
have occurred. The FINA delegation expressed that positive doping tests were the result of
understanding with this compromise but wanted ingesting food or food supplements, even when
to be told of changes as soon as implemented. such explanations made no sense at all (e.g.,
Regarding the CSA’s stated intention to an- that two swimmers tested positive for the di-
nounce all sanctions immediately to the public, uretic triamterine after eating pig liver).
the delegation expressed concern that it had SSA representatives admitted the SSA lacked
taken 10 months to advise FINA of the three control over swimmers. Even when a swimmer
DHT positives in November 1998. was suspended for a doping violation, that
Despite the CSA being able to register all of swimmer could continue to train and receive a
its 1,200 members, it was still experiencing stipend from his or her club. However, such a
difficulties in maintaining proper registration swimmer did lose financial benefits in the way
procedures throughout such a large country, a of prizes and sponsorships (Leonard 2000).
problem compounded by the fact that the great When asked why there was such a high
majority of Chinese swimmers were not regis- incidence of positive doping tests in Shanghai,
tered members of CSA. This gives the CSA no the answer was that more good swimmers
authority over these swimmers when it comes lived in Shanghai than in other provinces so
to out-of-competition testing and other regula- more testing occurred.
tory measures. By the end of FINA’s third visit to China in
In particular there had been an incident in December 1999, it was clear that this policy
1998 in which a FINA sampling agent had toward China was meeting with mixed results.
sought to test a Chinese swimmer who the CSA The FINA delegation did not recommend an-
claimed was not registered with CSA, even other visit by a similar FINA delegation. They
though he was training with other CSA-regis- believed that as much had been accomplished
tered swimmers in Shanghai. It appears that by such visits as could be hoped for and that
CSA only controls the elite swimmers in China, FINA rather should assist those in responsible
while the provincial swimming organizations positions within the CSA to continue the fight
such as the Shanghai Swimming Association against doping.

--- Page 230 Text ---
Doping, Testing, and Modern Efforts to Gain an Edge 215
Positive Drug Tests by Swimmers by Country
1. China—38 total, with two swimmers caught twice
2. Russia/USSR—8 total, with one swimmer caught twice
3. United States, Great Britain—7
4. Spain—6
5. Austria, Australia—4
6. Belgium, Poland, Brazil, France—3
7. Canada, Germany, New Zealand, South Africa—2
8. Tunisia, Egypt, Argentina, Indonesia, Finland, Ukraine, Ireland, Mexico, Lithuania,
Slovenia, Ecuador, Italy, Slovakia, Singapore—1
9. Excused (no sanction): Netherlands—one swimmer twice; Greece—1
10. Not counted: United States—1, swimmer retired
Reprinted by permission from Swimming’s Hall of Shame by B.S. Rushall (2000).
FINA Extraordinary Congress dishonest competitors and their handlers. In
poorer countries, the less sophisticated drugs
on Doping, Hong Kong,
appear to be the more common choice. One can
March 31, 1999
imagine the distracting effect on a clean swim-
mer about to start a race, wondering whether
The sole purpose of the FINA Extraordinary the ensuing competition will be against some-
Congress on Doping was to improve the FINA one whose prowess is prompted by honest
doping rules. To this end, FINA appointed a effort or by pill or needle.
working group of medical and legal personnel The pioneers of our sport would have found
to rewrite the FINA doping rules. it extremely difficult to understand the vastly
According to Leonard (1999), the working changed character of competitive swimming
group did an excellent job on the rewrite, and, as it exists today. They just would not have
combined with subsequent revisions, they pro- understood the biochemical manipulation of
vided a solid groundwork for taking the pro- athletes and all the associated quarrels, debate,
cess even further. The current edition of the rhetoric, and legal loopholes that have beset
FINA Rule Book includes the new legislation. the sport as a result. They wouldn’t have begun
to understand the problems associated with
Toward a Level Playing Field trying to keep the sport clean for those athletes
who still believe in fair play, least of all the often
During the past 30 years, the scourge of doping unfounded suspicions that attend any athlete’s
has reached a crisis point where the survival of pronounced and sudden improvement,
our sport, as we once knew it, now lies in the whether by natural means or not. The sad fact
balance. Many people are deeply concerned is that today’s sport is permeated with suspi-
about the rampant doping in many countries. cion at almost any indication of sudden im-
In wealthy populations, the use of anabolic provement, not to mention the odd occasion
steroids is rapidly becoming passé in favor of when swimmers glare at each other across the
human growth hormone and EPO (erythropoi- lanes at the end of a race and make personal
etin). Although athletes are not yet being thor- comments that are more than innuendo.
oughly tested for HGH and EPO, the growing There is a growing appreciation by the gen-
consensus is that these powerful—and highly eral swimming public that they have not been
dangerous—drugs are now the prime choice of listening to the voices of crackpots, eccentrics,

--- Page 231 Text ---
216 Breakthrough Swimming
The Future of Doping Control
In their article “The Future of Doping Control in Athletes,” Birkeland and Hemmersbach
(1999) state that sport cannot maintain its standards and reputation in society without
methods to detect modern doping agents like peptide hormones. Such methods probably
will rely on blood sample analysis. A secondary advantage of blood sampling is that DNA
technology identifies the donor. However, sport organizations and society in general must
answer legal and ethical questions before blood sampling becomes part of routine doping
control.
When antidoping programs were first developed, anabolic steroids and stimulants were
the most frequently used doping agents. These were easily detected in urine samples with
gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. In recent years, many athletes have turned to
other means to improve performance, including blood doping, erythropoietin, and human
growth hormone, all of which are not easily detected in urine. Therefore, additional
strategies must be developed, probably including the analysis of blood samples.
Nonautologic blood doping is an admixture of self and foreign red blood cells. Methods
are available to detect this form of doping in blood tests.
Erythropoietin use can be detected by finding an elevated level of soluble transferrin
receptor in serum. (Transferrin receptors are responsible for the transfer of iron and its
transport protein into the cell.) Erythropoietin use also can be detected by an abnormal
spectrum of erythropoietin isoforms, showing recombinant (synthetic) erythropoietin.
or people with a hidden self-serving agenda crisis caused by renewed drug cheating in
but to the voices of people, many of whom have swimming. However, for the first time in the
given a lifetime of service to the sport and are history of swimming, coaches from around
deeply concerned. A great deal of attention the world banded together to give interna-
focuses on methods of drug control, on how tional leadership to the sport. Memories of
tests are conducted, even sham testing that many talented swimmers, with world-beat-
denigrates the whole system, not to mention ing potential, who were ousted by drugged
the fine line between target testing and random East German swimmers continued to haunt
testing. and anger them. The World Swimming
A new development prior to the start of the Coaches Association, the American Swimming
Sydney Olympics was the pretesting of na- Coaches Association, and the Australian Swim-
tional teams immediately prior to their depar- ming Coaches Association led the way in ral-
ture to the Olympic Games. lying support for stringent penalties against
In the last decade of the 20th century, the cheating swimmers and their coaches, rang-
leaders of most national swimming federa- ing from temporary suspension to outright
tions were caught off guard by the sudden expulsion.

--- Page 232 Text ---
Chapter 13
Looking Back,
Looking Ahead
At the start of the 20th century, few
swimmers did any training or had
any idea what training meant. Nor
had they any idea what constituted
good stroke mechanics. A hundred
years ago, the sport was in its in-
fancy, and conditions were simple
and primitive.
When Dick Cavill and Freddie
Lane traveled from Australia to com-
pete in the 1902 English champion-
ships—where they both broke the
world record of 60-1/5 seconds for
the 100-yard freestyle—their return
sea voyage took over three months!
Today’s air travel takes a matter of
hours. Modern swimmers con-
stantly travel worldwide to com-
pete on the World Cup circuit and
other major meets. Their speed and
technical efficiency would simply
baffle the champions of yesteryear,
and the intensity and extent of their
training methods would be likewise
unbelievable.
In many parts of the world, de-
signing a beautiful and practical
modern swimming stadium became
an advanced art. Swimming pools
designed for speed with wave-re-
ducing lane markers significantly
improved standards. The giant mod-
ern swimming stadiums—complete
with thousands of comfortable the-
ater-type seats banked tier upon tier
high into the air; separate pools for
diving and warm-ups; and all the
217

--- Page 233 Text ---
218 Breakthrough Swimming
accoutrements of advanced technology, an en- The successes of Olympic star Johnny
vironment totally dedicated to produce inspired Weissmuller in the 1920s were said to have
swimming—would have left them awestruck. motivated thousands to become swimmers,
Rapid communications, television, and other and the introduction of age-group swimming
mass media spread technical knowledge around in the late 1940s saw an even greater increase
the world and popularized swimming to the in participants as the sport spread world-
extent that by the mid-20th century countries wide. The start of a formal age-group pro-
with no previous record of success were pro- gram in the United States led to similar pro-
ducing world-class swimmers. grams in many other countries, causing a
But contrasts do not end there. Today’s male dramatic worldwide surge in participation.
and female swimmers could easily beat the Competitive swimming annually attracted
turn-of-the-century 100-yard freestyle record. thousands of children generally too young to
In fact, even young children today are swim- be recruited by other sports. Important incen-
ming faster than the champions of only a few tives included fun, challenge, travel, athletic
decades ago! scholarships, and public recognition. Because
Throughout the 20th century, psychological of the youth of the participants, swimming
barriers continued to fall as swimmers gained became a family activity. Many parents gave
in confidence and raised their levels of aspira- valuable support by assisting with club ad-
tion. Their coaches concentrated on reducing ministration.
their swimmers’ weaknesses rather than merely
developing their strong points. Swimmers Improvements in Stroke
learned the importance of relaxation and con- Mechanics
centration under pressure and were helped to
this end through mastering various visualiza- Imagine discovering a new swimming stroke
tion techniques. faster than any other ever known. That’s ex-
Supplementary land training was introduced actly what happened in Sydney, Australia, at
early in the second decade of the 20th century the start of the 20th century. The crawl stroke,
by Yale coach Bob Kiphuth, who claimed that as it became known, was based on the powerful
free exercises, pulley weights, and medicine ocean stroke used by the Polynesians for over
ball work helped swimmers improve muscular 1,000 years. The stroke quickly proved far su-
strength and power quicker than equivalent perior to the retarding stop-start actions of the
time spent in the water. Kiphuth’s exercises traditional English side-overarm stroke and
aimed to develop the big muscles of the trunk the trudgen.
with special emphasis on the latissimus, pecto- But the early crawl stroke was a difficult
ral, and teres major muscles as well as the long stroke to swim and bore little resemblance to
back muscles and those of the abdominal wall the polished techniques of modern swimming.
and legs. The exercises mainly were specific to Few could use the stroke to complete the 100-
swimming and involved the propulsive move- yard racing distance. Poor arm-stroke mechan-
ments of arms and legs and the muscles that ics and the lack of a breathing technique suited
maintain good body position in the water. to the welter of rapidly spinning arms caused
Workouts included rapid movements of the premature fatigue.
big muscle groups, which greatly stimulated For the first half of the century, swimmers
circulation and respiration. To maintain swim- and coaches experimented with all kinds of
mers’ interest, Kiphuth varied the exercises. different techniques. Only after decades of in-
Kiphuth included stretching for the shoulder tense technical analysis and experimentation
to enable an easy arm recovery and pelvic did the crawl stroke evolve into the facile and
rolling, lower back flattening, and overhead fluent racing stroke that is today a masterpiece
arm stretching to achieve a streamlined body of human ingenuity and adaptation. Even
position in the racing dive and the glide follow- young children can swim it for miles, and they
ing turns (Kiphuth 1942, 1950). often do so as easily as they can walk.

--- Page 234 Text ---
Looking Back, Looking Ahead 219
And so it went also with the other strokes of using two leg beats to each arm pull. Sieg
swimming. Backstroke was first swum in com- showed the stroke’s speed potential by
petition in the form of an inverted breaststroke swimming 100 yards in 60.2 seconds, but
with a double overarm recovery. Around 1902, the dolphin kick was ruled illegal because
backstroke was first swum with an inverted the legs moved in the vertical plane
reverse crawl action while using an inverted (Armbruster 1942, p. 24).
flutter kick. In 1912 the back crawl became an
Not until 1956 was the butterfly stroke al-
official event, and swimmers such as Harry
lowed in Olympic competition, simply because
Hebner and Adolph Kiefer were among the
the IOC refused to add new competitions to the
great pioneers of the stroke. Kiefer swam with
Olympic program. Thus for 21 years, the world
a shallow straight-arm pull and a very low
of swimming had a new stroke with great
lateral straight-arm recovery.
potential but with no event in which it could be
The butterfly stroke was invented in 1933 by
legally swum—a sad reflection on FINA and
swimmer Henry Myers and subsequently im-
the IOC.
proved by other outstanding swimmers. Origi-
For hundreds of years, breaststroke had been
nally the butterfly complied with the rules of
the traditional swimming stroke. When first
breaststroke swimming as they existed. But in
swum in competition, the stroke was usually
1935, Jack Sieg, a University of Iowa swimmer,
performed to a sedate and carefully timed
developed the skill of swimming on his side
rhythm of pull-kick-glide, using a wide arm-
and beating his legs in unison similar to the
pull and kick. Today, of course, skilled swim-
action of a fish’s tail.
mers try to keep their rhythm as continuous as
[Sieg] tried the same leg action while swim- possible.
ming face down. Sieg synchronized his For years, progress in breaststroke swim-
leg action with the butterfly arm action ming was hindered by rulemakers ignorant of
Stroke Technicians and Innovators
Canadian coach Howard Firby (1924–1991) is regarded as one of the greatest stroke
teachers ever. Like Counsilman, Firby was a World War II pilot. While Counsilman applied
his knowledge of aerodynamics to the science of swimming, Firby applied his to the art of
coaching. Firby coached Vancouver’s Canadian Dolphins Club, where he produced a long
line of great swimmers. As a full-time commercial artist, Firby used his drawing expertise
to revolutionize the art of coaching swimming. His unique drawings and ability to illustrate
the strokes from a variety of angles clearly showed how crawl swimmers and backstrokers
naturally roll their bodies on the long axis, while butterfly and breaststroke swimmers rotate
their bodies up and down on the short axis like airplanes taking off and landing. Firby
illustrated his book Howard Firby on Swimming (1975) himself. The book became a classic
and a collector’s item. In the 1990s, Firby’s writings and unique descriptive terminology have
been frequently copied.
Walter Schlueter (1910–1987), U.S. Olympic and Pan American Games coach, was
another great stroke technician and innovator of the 20th century. He originated the short-
rest broken swim training method for learning the pace of a race. As coach of the Arizona
Desert Rats in Phoenix (where he was popularly known as the “Pied Piper”), Schlueter
developed many of the popular stroke drills still in vogue today. He later became technique
coach to California’s highly successful Mission Viejo team under coach Mark Schubert,
where he is said to have done his finest work honing the strokes of dozens of America’s best
swimmers. Schubert said he had never seen a coach with so quick an eye for detecting the
flaws in a swimmer’s technique.

--- Page 235 Text ---
220 Breakthrough Swimming
the basic nature of the stroke. Consequently the faster. Where coach and scientist cooperated at
rules they set were easily circumvented by training venue and competition site, however,
swimmers using deviations such as butterfly- more positive results were achieved; this ap-
breaststroke and prolonged underwater swim- proach gradually became common in several
ming. In order to prevent underwater swim- countries.
ming, the rules required that part of the head Most technical improvement resulted from
remain visible above the surface, but this stifled practical coaches and talented athletes learn-
the natural flow of the stroke. Eventually pro- ing through trial and error. It became clear from
gressive rules were made that permitted a swim- past achievements that when the need was
mer to submerge for part of each stroke cycle, imperative, progress could not wait for the
an improvement that resulted in a more fluent development of theory. More often than not,
overall action. the search for theory was inspired by practical
success.
Improvements in Training Continuing improvements were imple-
mented by coaches who were inspirational and
Methods
innovative leaders and often natural practical
psychologists. They encouraged their swim-
Most of the training methods used in swim-
mers to believe that possibilities for improve-
ming originated on the running track. At the
ment had no limits. This intrinsic quality—the
turn of the century, track athletes were already
striving by the human spirit to excel, to surpass
experimenting with interval training, but this
previous achievements, and to seek new hori-
form of training was not adapted to competi-
zons—has been the most important factor in
tive swimming until the mid-1950s. Before then,
the remarkable progress of the sport.
swimmers were preoccupied with perfecting
After Counsilman’s innovative work had
techniques and had no idea how much stress
revolutionized the technical approach to swim-
the human body could endure.
ming and showed how science, useful science,
In the 1960s, the work of coaches such as
could be beneficially applied, a spate of scien-
Forbes Carlile, Sherman Chavoor, Dr. James
tific papers followed from many sources. Nov-
Counsilman, Peter Daland, Harry Gallagher,
ice coaches apparently were dazzled by the
Don Gambril, George Haines, and Don Talbot
volume of scientific results and evidence placed
showed how subtle variations of work-to-rest
before them. They didn’t realize that most re-
ratios could be applied to produce speed or
search is a progress report rather than a conclu-
endurance effects, or both. Training programs
sion. Perhaps the classic quote of the 20th cen-
were set according to individual needs—train-
tury on the subject of the information explosion
ing for short-, middle-, or long-distance events.
came from a Canadian coach, Alain Lefebvre:
These formats included ascending or descend-
“Years ago there was a desert of information.
ing series, reverse IMs, and endless other such
Now it is a jungle. The question is how to get
permutations. As the century progressed, many
through it” (Young 1990).
other items were included in the typical sea-
sonal training format, such as cyclic training,
The Evolution of the Modern
negative splits, pace training, and balancing
distance per stroke with stroke rate. Swimming Stadium
Scientific Research The modern swimming stadium is a far cry
from the first public bath halls and wash houses
Scientific research assisted some programs de- or even the first public swimming baths. Most
spite a tendency to cause confusion through pools were totally inadequate for competitive
information overload and lack of simple com- swimming, and some were so filthy and lack-
munication. Most research, however, had little ing in good hygiene that one observer com-
or no use in actual practice because its primary mented that they were “better suited for ratting
aim generally was not to help swimmers go expeditions.”

--- Page 236 Text ---
Looking Back, Looking Ahead 221
Top Swimmers of the 20th Century
The seven judges who compiled these rankings are all long-time students of the sport: Cecil
Colwin; Peter Daland, historian and U.S. Olympic Coach; Buck Dawson, first director of the
International Swimming Hall of Fame; Bob Duenkel, current director of the Hall; Bob
Ingram, an editor of Swimming World and Junior Swimmer for 27 years; Craig Lord of The
London Times and senior European correspondent of Swimming World and Junior Swimmer;
and Dr. Phillip Whitten, editor in chief of Swimming World and Junior Swimmer. Among the
selection criteria set by Dr. Phillip Whitten and used by the judges were
1. dominance;
2. number and quality of world records;
3. Olympic and other major titles, bearing in mind that the number of meets and the
number of events at each meet has expanded greatly in the last few decades, and
bearing in mind the impact of the two world wars, boycotts, and doping;
4. longevity in the sport;
5. longevity of the swimmer’s records;
6. impact of the swimmer on the sport and on the wider society; and
7. other factors such as training conditions, overcoming various obstacles, etc.
Table 13.1 Top Male Swimmers of the 20th Century
Rank Swimmer Points Rank Swimmer Points
1 Mark Spitz, USA (4) 172 Mike Barrowman, USA 60
2 Johnny Weissmuller, USA (3) 163 15 Arne Borg, SWE 56
3 Matt Biondi, USA 128 16 Mike Burton, USA 55
4 Murray Rose, AUS 123 Roland Mathes, GDR 55
5 Duke Kahanamoku, USA 116 18 Eric Rademacher, GER 44
6 Kieren Perkins, AUS 107 19 Ian Thorpe, AUS 41
7 Don Schollander, USA 103 20 Hironoshin Furuhashi, JPN 37
8 Alexander Popov, RUS 102 21 Tim Shaw, USA 34
9 Vladimir Salnikov, RUS 99 22 Tamas Darnyi, HUN 33
10 Adolph Kiefer, USA 86 23 Yoshiyuki Tsuruta, JPN 28
11 John Naber, USA 85 24 Jon Konrads, AUS 25
12 Michael Gross, GER 73 Denis Pankratov, RUS 25
13 Charlie Daniels, USA 60
First-place votes are in parentheses.
Others receiving votes: Barney Kieran, AUS (24); Grant Hackett, AUS (24); Buster Crabbe, USA (23); John Hencken, USA (23); David
Theile, AUS (19); Steve Clark, USA (17); Charlie Hickox, USA (16); Pablo Morales, USA (16); Andrew Charlton, AUS (12); Brian Goodell,
USA (12); Alex Baumann, CAN (12); Fred Lane, AUS (12); Warren Kealoha, USA (11); David Wilkie, GBR (11); Gary Hall Sr., USA (11);
Tom Jager, USA (11); Evgeni Sadovyi, RUS (11); Richard Cavill, AUS (11); Tedford Cann, USA (10); John Devitt, AUS (8); Jeff Rouse, USA
(7); Jonty Skinner, RSA (7); Rowdy Gaines, USA (7); Walter Bathe, GER (6); Gunnar Larsson, SWE (5); Kevin Berry, AUS (4); George
Hodgson, CAN (4); Jim Montgomery, USA (4); Henry Taylor, GBR (3); George Kojac, USA (2); Danyon Loader, NZ (1); Sir Frank Beaurepaire,
AUS (1); Michael Wenden, AUS (1).
(continued)

--- Page 237 Text ---
222 Breakthrough Swimming
(continued)
Table 13.2 Top Female Swimmers of the 20th Century
Rank Swimmer Points Rank Swimmer Points
1 Dawn Fraser, AUS (4) 171 14 Sybil Bauer, USA 66
2 Janet Evans, USA 151 15 Penny Heyns, RSA 61
3 Tracy Caulkins, USA 145 16 Donna de Varona, USA (1) 58
4 Shane Gould, AUS 138 17 Ann Curtis, USA 51
5 Mary T. Meagher, USA (1) 137 18 Tracey Wickham, AUS 50
6 Debbie Meyer, USA 103 19 Karen Muir, RSA 43
7 Ragnhild Hveger, DEN (1) 91 Amy Van Dyken, USA 43
8 Shirley Babashoff, USA 80 21 Jenny Thompson, USA 41
9 Kristina Egerszegi, HUN 78 22 Hendrika Mastenbroek, NED 40
10 Claudia Kolb, USA 76 23 Galina Prozumenshikova, RUS 38
11 Helene Madison, USA 74 24 Fanny Durack, AUS 36
Lorraine Crapp, AUS 74 25 Gertrude Ederle, USA 29
13 Ethelda Bleibtrey, USA 73
First-place votes are in parentheses.
Others receiving votes: Sharon Stouder, USA (26); Martha Norelius, USA (25); Robyn Johnson, USA (24); Ada Kok, NED (24); Cor Kint,
NED (22); Katherine Rawls, USA (20); Eleanor Holm, USA (17); Claudia Poll, CRC (16); Chris Von Saltza, USA (16); Franziska Van Almsick,
GER (16); Melissa Belote, USA (14); Catie Ball, USA (13); Greta Andersen, DEN (11); Willemijntje den Ouden, NED (11); Cynthia
Woodhead, USA (9); Karen Harup, DEN (9); Nancy Garapick, CAN (9); Summer Sanders, USA (9); Ilsa Konrads, AUS (9); Jan Henne, USA
(7); Susie O’Neill, AUS (7); Katalin Szoke, HUN (7); Catherine Plewinski, FRA (3); Elaine Tanner, CAN (2); Maria Braun, NED (1).
The rankings of the top male and female swimmers of the 20th century first appeared in Swimming World and Junior Swimmer, December 1999, and are
reprinted here by permission of the editor, Dr. Phillip Whitten, and the publisher, Sports Publications, Inc.
At the international level, it was a long time reported times and placings to the recorder,
before competitions were held over standard who then gave them to the official announcer.
distances. Some 28 years passed after the re-
vival of the Olympic Games at Athens in 1896 Training Aids and Equipment
before the Olympic swimming events were
conducted in the 50-meter course we know The introduction of the pace clock and the
today. humble swimming goggle may well have been
The modern swimming pool is designed for among the most important items of technical
speed, with constant depth and overflow gut- equipment introduced in the 20th century. The
ters to dampen turbulence. The early rope lane pace clock, for the first time, freed the coach
markers, supported by wooden or cork floats, from the need to carry a stopwatch. Swimmers
gave way to continuous antiturbulence plastic were able to time themselves, and the use of the
lanes. For the first 60 years of the century, built-in time interval enabled each swimmer to
before electronic timing and judging systems, work to a specific work-to-rest ratio. The swim-
swimmers were timed by handheld watches ming goggle protected the eyes from chemical
and were subject to the vagaries of human error irritation and contributed significantly to im-
in timing and judging. Delays resulted at the proved standards, as swimmers could increase
end of each race while timekeepers and judges distances swum in training.

--- Page 238 Text ---
Looking Back, Looking Ahead 223
The list of equipment and other training aids long sleeves and leggings down to the ankles.
grew throughout the century. First, the wooden The accompanying advertising encouraged
kickboard appeared (now replaced by a plastic swimmers to “swim out of your skin,” then
one), then inflated tubes to raise the hips (now added the somewhat disconcerting comment
replaced by plastic pull buoys). Then came a that the “water won’t even know you’re there.”
whole array of new devices—big flippers, small According to one manufacturer’s advertis-
flippers, racing flippers, monofins for dolphin ing, the suit had gripper fabric to grip and feel
kicking, fist gloves for improving feel of the the water and was designed to provide an
water, resistance cords and surgical tubing of optimal silhouette, to control the flow of water,
all types, friction-resistance exercisers such as and to reduce drag. In effect, the swimmer is
the Exergenie, velocity meters, the isokinetic encased in a racing shell that sloughs off water
swim bench, Universal and Nautilus machines, resistance, while the special grippers on the
pulley weight machines, free weights, and medial surfaces enable him or her to grip the
medicine balls. water, much like using a swim paddle. In light
Viewing windows that enabled underwater of the apparent advantages afforded by the
stroke analysis were at once a novelty and a suit, it came as a surprise to many that on
valuable coaching aid. In the latter half of the October 8, 1999, FINA ruled that the suits
20th century, the former East German regime could be worn at international meets because
operated six swimming flumes, or specially FINA did not consider them a “device” (a
designed tanks, in which tethered swimmers device that aids swimming is clearly prohib-
swam against a regulated flow of water to have ited in their rules).
their stroke techniques analyzed. In the 1990s, Many observers thought FINA had made a
a whole new opportunity for learning opened big mistake in approving the use of body suits,
up with the advent of the robotic underwater saying that the FINA bureau had ignored its
camcorder that can move around the pool while own rule SW 10.7, namely that “No swimmer
clearly recording everything swimmers do shall be permitted to use or wear any device that
while racing. may aid his speed, buoyancy or endurance
during a competition” (my italics) and, further-
Swimming Suits more, that the “etc.” in the examples of devices
given therein, “gloves, flippers, fins, etc.” should
Annette Kellermann, an early pioneer of logically be taken to include all equipment or
women’s swimming, complained bitterly about devices worn around the body.
the voluminous water overcoats that threat-
The Natural Evolution Argument
ened to drown early women swimmers. Then
came the era of heavy woolen suits for both
The manufacturers argued that the long suits
men and women, with shoulder straps and
reflected progress into the space age and that
frontal skirts to preserve modesty. The evolu-
such suits represented a natural progression
tion of the swimsuit was marked by sleeker
from wool to cotton, silk, Nylon, and Lycra.
and sleeker—and lighter—suits specially de-
This argument was not strictly accurate, as it
signed for racing. Gradually the skirts gave
overlooked the greatly increased amount of
way to suits that were gradually, and even
material used in the body suit.
fashionably, scalloped away to reveal more
Prior to the advent of the new suits, the
and more of the lower torso, while remaining
amount of fabric used in manufacturing the
passably modest.
traditional racing suit was limited to covering
Natural Swimming Versus the torso within the confines of modesty, and it
was reasonable and defensible to attempt to
Equipment Swimming
reduce drag in the choice and design of this
Controversy arose with the advent of bizarre- limited amount of fabric. But many thought the
looking, full-length body suits for racing, with swimsuit manufacturers had taken too much

--- Page 239 Text ---
224 Breakthrough Swimming
upon themselves in attempting to alter the Many swimmers and coaches protest that
concept of natural swimming by using high- the body suit is an aberration and that if you
tech fabrics that cover a large percentage of the can’t feel the water on your body, then you’re
body—that is, everything but the head, hands, not really swimming. However, there may be
and feet—and are designed to reduce natural one real plus to wearing a body suit. When
skin-to-water drag and, as reported, perhaps worn as a practice suit, the suit in effect blinds
even increase buoyancy and natural propul- the sensory nerve endings to the feel of the
sive effort. water. Thus, when the suit is taken off, the
The suits were considered to be too expen- nerve endings overcompensate by becoming
sive for what hitherto has been regarded as a extra sensitive to the feel of the transient (mov-
popular sport within the reach of all. And, ing) flow of the water on the limbs. When the
furthermore, even if they weren’t performance swimmer reverts to swimming in a normal,
enhancing and too expensive for the wider traditional swimsuit, he or she finds that feel of
swimming population, more often than not, the water has been almost miraculously en-
unless personally measured, they don’t fit most hanced.* The little exercise mentioned here
swimmers properly. Contrary to the claims made seems to lend weight to the opinion that wear-
by manufacturers, it’s impossible to provide ing a body suit is not a natural way of swim-
perfectly fitting suits for the wide variety of ming because it takes away a swimmer’s gen-
human body shapes, bearing in mind that shape eral feel of the water!
is only partially related to height and weight.
Speed Enhancing or Not
Poorly fitting suits purchased off the rack could
actually prove to be performance retarding.
At this point, the jury is still out on whether the
body suits actually aid performance, even when
Interference With Natural Sensory
worn by great athletes receiving huge endorse-
Perception ment fees. So far, no tangible proof or guarantee
exists that these new suits achieve anything
Apart from legalistic arguments, there’s no new or spectacular in the way of increased
escaping the fact that wearing a full-length performance that can definitely be attributed to
body suit changes the whole character of com- scientific advances. Independently conducted,
petitive swimming, from a natural sport, in scientific hydrodynamic testing is needed to
which the human body interfaces directly with prove (1) that the suits really work and (2) that
the water, into an implement sport, in which they are the worth the money. If the suits are
the body suit intervenes between the body and proved to help performance, then surely they
its natural contact with the water. should be banned from competition. Conversely,
Under normal circumstances, human swim- if the suits do not improve performance, then
ming movements are modified by sensory what’s the point of all the extra material and the
stimuli received from the skin, muscles, and extra financial cost to the swimmer?
joints, and these sensory impulses act at all At the Sydney Olympics, swimmers wore a
times to guide muscular contractions. The sense variety of body suits made by different manu-
of balance in the water and the pressure of the facturers. A few wore suits that covered the
water against the sensory surfaces of the hands, arms and legs entirely, while others reached to
legs, and other parts of the body must aid the knees only. Some swimmers still preferred
tremendously in regulating a smooth and ef- to wear traditional style suits without sleeves
fective stroke. The development of this sensi- or leggings. But even these suits are now made
tivity to the proprioceptive and afferent nerve of a new material that appears to be water
currents is largely the difference between an repellent and perhaps even designed to in-
expert and a mediocre swimmer. crease buoyancy.
* The physiological basis/explanation of these observations on increased skin sensitivity after wearing the body suit are based on
scientific fact, especially in the work of Dr. A. Lee Dellon, in rehabilitating sensory perception after hand surgery. See chapter 6, page 116.

--- Page 240 Text ---
Looking Back, Looking Ahead 225
Some freestyle swimmers cut the sleeves off The FINA World Cup meets are held in dif-
their body suits because they said the sleeves ferent geographical zones—Europe, the Ameri-
hampered the recovery of their arms from the cas, the Far East (Asia), and Australia. The
water, a claim also made by some backstroke program of events is the same at each meet, and
swimmers. Breaststroke swimmers preferred in recent years, all World Cup meets have been
not to wear body suits at all, saying that the suits held in the short course, 25-meter course.
caused their legs to rise too high in the water, an The amount of available prize money is mini-
awkward position that made an efficient kick mal and not really comparable with that of-
difficult to perform. On the other hand, some fered in most other professional sports. In fact,
butterfly swimmers felt an increase in buoy- prize money amounts to far less than the aver-
ancy that they say made their strokes feel easier, age cost of traveling to meets on other conti-
if not faster. One of the world’s greatest swim- nents. For example, a swimmer wanting to
mers, Alexander Popov, Olympic 100-meter travel to every World Cup meet would prob-
freestyle champion in 1992 and 1996, however, ably face expenses totaling about $10,000.
continued to swim in a standard pair of trunks, The prize money and bonuses for breaking
saying, “I like my own skin best,” thus confirm- world records are still relatively small. The
ing the opinion of at least one hydrodynamacist. average prize money for winning a series is
Time will tell whether the controversial suits only $4,000. Many leading American swim-
will win general acceptance. mers say that they can earn more money stay-
While these ultraexpensive suits may repre- ing at home and conducting clinics and camps
sent a bonanza in the form of increased profits than they can make on the World Cup circuit.
for racing swim suit manufacturers, the cost of If a nation is hosting a World Cup meet, it is
participation has increased by hundreds of compulsory to send a minimum of four com-
dollars a year for thousands of swimmers petitors to each of the other meets, and there is
around the world. This large expense instantly a financial penalty for failing to comply with
changes swimming from a popular sport, in this rule.
which the price of equipment was minimal, The big money is to be made through spon-
into yet another high-tech sport. Swimming is sorship by a big company, such as a communi-
now part of a general trend by manufacturers cations firm or a swimwear manufacturer, or
of most sports equipment to use the Olympic through bonuses from sponsors for breaking
Games as a quadrennial showcase for their records. The earnings of most so-called profes-
increasingly expensive products. sional swimmers are said to be merely at subsis-
tence levels and cannot begin to be compared
The FINA World Cup Circuit with those of millionaire basketball players, for
example. The cream of the crop in swimming
As predicted in the first edition of this book might make a few hundred thousand dollars,
(but not expected so soon), a new elite tier of whereas an NFL football player recently signed
swimmers has risen. Of these full-time profes- a $55 million contract. Swimming is not in that
sionals, two or three are already reputed to be league, and it probably never will be.
millionaires—largely through corporate spon- As far as FINA’s annual World Cup circuit is
sorship and endorsement fees rather than concerned, spectator interest is not particu-
through prize money at swim meets. larly keen, although there are notable excep-
Between this group and the groups at the tions at some venues. For example, the stands
grass-roots levels, a large gap has been forged are always filled at Australian meets and some-
in the sport’s organizational pyramid. In fact, times also in Germany and Sweden, where TV
the new structure closely resembles that of the coverage is particularly good and meets are
former East German swimming regime, where often spectacularly staged, with attractive
the grass-roots level formed a convenient nurs- prizes offered. By contrast, in Hong Kong and
ery from which the plums were picked for Shanghai, World Cup meets are sparsely at-
specialized training in centralized schools. tended.

--- Page 241 Text ---
226 Breakthrough Swimming
The overall impression is that interest in the not unlikely that one day, the federations may
World Cup seems to hold a greater attraction for not be able to afford this game, and they may
European followers of the sport, probably be- have to ask themselves, “Is it really worth our
cause of the shorter traveling distances. Citing while to spend thousands of dollars in travel on
the meager prize money, the preponderance of meets of inconsistent quality?”
50-meter events, and that the meets are held in The question also arises whether the lower
the short course, many people in North America levels of grass-roots competitors—the amateurs,
and Australia question the need for a World Cup for want of a better term—may not also be
circuit. It appears the Australians attended mainly losing out somewhere along the line. Their
because they had a little extra funding available subscription fees, in effect, are sponsoring the
after staging the Olympics in their own country. continuous overseas travel of a so-called elite
On the other hand, although the leading swim- tier of professionals.
mers do not always compete in the World Cup,
some people believe that if the World Cup disap- History As It Happens
peared completely, media exposure and spon-
sorship for the sport would diminish. For at least two years before the Sydney Olym-
Critics of the World Cup circuit are not slow pics, swimming enthusiasts around the world
to point out that not all the meets on the circuit debated whether Kieren Perkins, the great
can be said to be truly world-class meets, in Australian 1,500-meter swimmer and long-time
which world-class swimmers compete against world-record holder in the event, would suc-
each other. Although some meets are billed as cessfully defend his Olympic title for the third
“World Cup Meets,” the entry often consists time, this time against Grant Hackett, his coun-
mainly of local swimmers with few, if any, tryman and a fast-rising star.
entries of world-class stature. Furthermore, Finally, on September 23, 2000, the big day
world-class swimmers prefer long-course came. But there was one big snag. Although
swimming, which they consider a better test of NBC, the official Olympic Games network, had
swimming ability, compared with short-course broadcast a record 441 hours of Games cover-
racing, which they view as more like gymnastic age, not one second of it had been broadcast
events consisting mainly of turning and a great live. Because of the 15-hour time difference
deal of underwater kicking. These swimmers between Sydney and New York, NBC had de-
regard competing in the occasional short-course cided to wait until prime time the following day
meet as a useful sharpening-up exercise in before showing the hot-ticket sports, including
preparation for the more prestigious long- swimming, track and field, and gymnastics.
course competition. (A passing thought: even But, as the exciting 1,500-meter duel between
the Olympic Games would soon lose their lus- Kieren Perkins and Grant Hackett rapidly un-
ter if they were held every week. Rarity is what folded, a journalist on the Sydney Morning
makes them so special.) According to Dennis Herald, watching the event in the Olympic Sta-
Pursley, national team director of US Swim- dium, made history by tapping out a live stroke-
ming, most of the 2000 Olympic swimming for-stroke report from his pool-side laptop di-
medalists were “very selective” in participat- rect to the Worldwide Web.
ing in the international competition circuit prior
Sport Science
to the Olympics. Only 18 percent of the Olym-
pic medalists had medaled in the Short Course and the Information Explosion
World Championships (Pursley 2000).
A growing perception is that the World Cup We have seen how the nature and character of
circuit tends to attract a cluster of athletes, competitive swimming changed over the last
about a hundred in number, who tour the world 100 years. But progress was slow and gradual,
like a little circus group. Although the federa- with the greatest improvements in swimming
tions fund their travel costs and the athletes get knowledge coming from imaginative coaches
to keep whatever prize money they win, it is working with talented swimmers. Progressive

--- Page 242 Text ---
Looking Back, Looking Ahead 227
Professional Olympic Athletes
In the July 17, 2000, issue of the Financial Post, Paul Gaines reported that Mr. Pound, the vice
president of the Olympic Committee, said that . . .
. . . athletes indirectly get support. They don’t have to pay their way to the Olympics
or pay for their accommodation and food. And their federations get money for
coaching and for qualifying competitions. They don’t get money in their pocket, and
I don’t see that happening in the future.
However, already some of the world’s leading swimmers and their agents are asking why
the IOC should not share some of the billions of dollars of sponsorship and advertising
money with the athletes, who have always performed at the Olympics free of charge. Times
are changing, and it might not be long before the world’s top swimmers and track athletes
seek large fees for competing in the Olympics before billions of TV watchers around the
world.
Even before the 2000 Sydney Olympics had ended, postmortems were being held in
several countries, attempting to assess why their athletes had not done better than
expected. Canada, a country that relies heavily on direct government funding, finished 24th
overall in all sports, with only three gold medals. The immediate reaction, on national TV
programs and in the printed media, was to call for more money to be thrown at the problem.
The media compared funding and rewards offered in Canada (population 31 million) with
those offered in Australia (population 19 million), a country that finished 4th overall in all
sports with 15 gold medals (behind the United States, Russia, and China). Australia spent
$280 million on Olympic sports compared to Canada’s budget of $62 million (Deacon 2000).
All the political parties were immediately in favor of such a solution, especially with signs
of a general election in the offing. However, others suggested that taxpayer money should
no longer fund professional athletes without requesting that such funding be paid back
eventually in the same manner as loans paid to university students learning a profession.
Another suggestion was that individual sports should be reorganized along the lines of
the very popular sport of Formula One motor racing, with different multinational corpora-
tions instead of governments sponsoring their own national teams of leading professional
swimmers, athletes, and gymnasts. Furthermore, an essential part of the contractual
agreements between the parties concerned would include regular out-of-competition drug
testing, with salary refund penalties and suspensions for those testing positive.
coaches accepted or rejected new ideas and significant contributions were made by scien-
methods and intuitively modified and devel- tists who were coaches, swimmers, or both.
oped them with the conscious goal of making These intuitive coach-swimmer-scientists un-
swimmers faster. Thus, the world of swimming derstood the needs of the sport, and thus their
was offered an ever-expanding range and vari- research was aimed at providing specific infor-
ety of inspiration for its future development. mation essential to progress.
Coaches and swimmers have been the great- Increased quantities of scientific research and
est innovators and contributors to swimming the information explosion were expected to
knowledge, despite claims that may be made intensify and accelerate the processes of change.
on behalf of formal scientific research. And it is Contrary to expectation, technical progress
important to note that when science did have became trapped amid a great logjam of diverse
an impact on swimming methods, the most junk information. The purpose and potential

--- Page 243 Text ---
228 Breakthrough Swimming
usefulness of this information was not always ment of leading swimmers was attributable to
clear, but it was certainly not always aimed their efforts. It is to the credit of many of these
directly at solving practical problems. coaches that throughout their careers, they often
Although science has acquired a rich heri- traveled to national and international meets at
tage of ideas from coaches and swimmers from their own expense to assist their swimmers.
which to work, the specific problems that face The history of swimming has shown time
the coaching practitioner have not always been and again that the leadership of capable and
fully recognized nor adequately addressed. inspired coaches, the people who possess the
And, although science has developed many real practical knowledge of the sport, can help
ways of acquiring new knowledge and invented a country consistently produce elite swimming
increasingly flexible and efficient instruments teams despite a mediocre or even self-serving
for using it, it is still far from being used in the administration at the helm. In some countries,
most effective and practical manner. discrimination against career coaches must have
For years, many swimming coaches have had a retarding effect on the development of
had an aversion to working with scientists, swimming, especially when compared with
mainly because they perceived many scientists the giant strides made in the United States,
to be patronizing or condescending and gener- where career coaches were officially recognized
ally more keen on acquiring academic credits as a welcome and integral part of the swim-
than helping the sport to progress. Whether ming organization. Particularly significant ex-
true or not, scientists often have been viewed as amples of these advances were the appoint-
cold, emotionless people living in a remote ments of leading coaches Ray Essick and Don
world of their own. Talbot to the positions of executive director of
While scientific literature must be clear on United States Swimming, Inc., and executive
what the scientist means when describing a director of Canadian Swimming, respectively.
particular study, scientists may have built a The career of Terry Gathercole (1935-2001) is
barrier to understanding between themselves further evidence that the future of swimming
and laypersons by using esoteric scientific lan- depends on the coaches. Gathercole rose
guage instead of the simple everyday English through the ranks, first as an Olympic swim-
that practical pool-deck coaches can readily mer and prolific world-record breaker then
understand and put into practice. These coaches later as a successful national coach, president
prefer the easy-to-understand communication of the Australian Swim Coaches Association,
like that used by James “Doc” Counsilman in and president of Australian Swimming during
his heyday. the 2000 Olympics. In addition to many other
notable contributions to the sport, Gathercole
The Role of the Professional played a leading role in the fight against perfor-
Swimming Coach mance enhancing drugs. Gathercole’s career
proved that professional coaches can make great
Although when it was inaugurated FINA had contributions at all levels, suggesting that
stipulated only who could and who could not FINA’s existing legislation should be changed
compete as an amateur, the amateur laws were to include professionals in every facet of its
applied in such a way as to purposefully ex- organization, not just as token members of
clude paid coaches and instructors from offi- certain commissions.
cial positions within the governing bodies of In any country, the future starts with the
swimming. In fact, until recently, paid coaches coaches—not administrators or scientists, but
were often treated in many countries as pariahs inspirational coaches working with talented
and lesser breeds without the law. swimmers. This is the first essential: the future
Professional coaches, as they were quaintly starts on the pool deck. Only afterward come
termed, were excluded from the governing bod- the administrators who plan the programs and
ies of the sport and from official coaching as- the possible assistance that science can pro-
signments with international teams, despite that vide. The future of swimming depends on the
much of the progress in the sport and the develop- coaches.

--- Page 244 Text ---
Appendix
A 400-Year
Bibliography
of the Historical
Development of the
Swimming Strokes
Grateful thanks are extended to Thomas K. meant to provide historical rather than state-
Cureton, a pioneer of scientific research in swim- of-the-art resources.
ming, for giving me permission to use as a
Elyot, Sir Thomas. 1531. The boke named the governour.
framework for this bibliography the footnotes
London: Thomas Berthelet.
originally contained in Cureton’s classic How to
[This book on the training of gentlemen included a
Teach Swimming and Diving, volumes 1 and 2
section on swimming. The popularity of the volume is
(1934).
evidenced in a string of subsequent editions in 1537,
These materials were then arranged in chro-
1544, 1546, 1553, 1557, 1565, and 1580. Near the end of
nological order, and other titles were added. The the 19th century, scholars began a set of reprints—1880,
materials shown in brackets following a num- 1906, 1962, and 1970—with translations into German
ber of the entries are the results of further re- and Italian in the 1930s.]
search—including additions, verifications, re- Wynman, Nicolaus. 1538. Colymbetes, sive de arte natandi
visions, and annotations—conducted by me in dialogus et festivus et iucundus lectu. (Dutch Copy).
the records of the Library of Congress; the Brit- Ingolstadt, Bavaria: H. Steiner.
ish Library Catalogue; the National Union Cata- [Wynman’s very early text experienced many reincar-
log; the Rare Books Division of the National nations, including three Latin reprints in 1623, 1638,
Library of Canada; the Library of Parliament, and 1644, and even an 1889 extract in a German publi-
cation titled Heidelberg.]
Canada; and the North Carolina Collection of
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Magnus, Olaus. 1555. Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus.
The bracketed notes point out items of infor- Rome: Magno Gotho.
mation that might prove interesting to sport [Magnus’s History of the Nordic Folk told of swimming
historians and scientists (and anyone else inter- practices in Scandinavia among many other things.
ested in swimming). Also, note that the bibliog- Magnus, Archbishop of Upsala, went into voluntary
exile in Rome after the Swedish Reformation. In 1546 he
raphy covers the 400 years from 1531 to 1930. To
represented Pope Paul III to the Council of Trent. The
be sure, modern definitive texts on swimming
first complete Italian translation of his history appeared
appear after these years, but the bibliography is in 1565, some seven years after his death.]
229

--- Page 245 Text ---
230 Appendix
Dygbeio (Digby), Everardo (Everard). 1587. De arte natandi provides some insight into this ancient island nation’s
libri duo, quorum prior regulas ipsius artis, posterior vero perception of swimming.]
praxin demonstrationemque continet. London: (s.n.).
Bernardi, de Oronzio. 1807. Arte de Nadar Compendiada del
[Digby’s De arte natandi was translated into French que Escribio en Italiano. Madrid: (s.n.).
from Latin by Melchisedec Thevenot under the title
Frost, J. 1816. Scientific swimming. A series of practical
L’Art de nager a century later. An interesting bibliogra-
illustrations on an original and progressive plan, by which
phy of Everard Digby, MA, fellow of St. John’s college,
the art of swimming may be readily attained, with every
Cambridge, can be found in the Dictionary of National
advantage of power in the water; accompanied with 12
Bibliography. He was a different person from Sir Everard
copper-plate engravings, comprising 26 appropriate figures.
Digby, who was not born until 1578 and was executed
London: Darton, Harvey and Darton, Gracechurch
for his infamous role in Guy Fawkes’ Gunpowder Plot
Street. 8 volumes, 12 plates.
of 1606. However, Mr. Digby, the swimming author, got
into much trouble through his eccentric conduct, which [Frost, many years teacher of the art of swimming at
included his “habit of blowing a hunting horn and Nottingham, sought to approach swimming scientifi-
hallooing in the college, most unseemly conduct for a cally. His Scientific Swimming was described as a series
clergyman”(Thomas 1904, page 177).] of scientific instructions that facilitated the attainment
of the art of swimming.]
Middleton, Christopher. 1595. A short introduction for to
learne to swimme gathered out of Master Digbie’s booke of the Frost, J. 1818. The art of swimming. New York: P.W. Gallaudet.
art of swimming (trans.). Translated into English for the
Clias, Peter H. 1825. An elementary course of gymnastic
better instruction of those who understand not the
exercises and a new and complete treatise on the art of
Latine tongue. With wooden cuts of persons swim-
swimming with the report made to the medical faculty of
ming. London: (s.n.).
Paris on the subject (4th ed.). London: Sherwood, Gilbert
Percey, William. 1658. The compleat swimmer, or The art of and Piper.
swimming. London: J.C. for H. Fletcher. About 90 pages
Mason, James, and Payne, A.M. 1839 and 1840. Prize essays
with preface.
of the national, now the British society on the art of swim-
Thevenot, Melchisedec. 1696. L’art de nager. Paris: T. Moette, ming. London: (s.n.).
rue de la Boucherie. Avec privilege du Roi.
Howard, Sydney (pseudonym). 1849. The science of swim-
[This was a direct translation of the Latin book De Arte ming as taught and practiced in civilized and savage coun-
Natandi (Digby 1587) and was published four years tries. New York: Fowler and Wells.
after Thevenot’s death in 1692. In 1699, the book was
Richardson, B.C. 1857. Instructions on the art of swimming.
translated back into English by an unknown translator
London: James Ridgeway.
and published in London by Dan Brown, D. Midurnter,
T. Leigh, and Robert Knaplock. (Digby’s work was Forrest, George (pseudonym for Rev. John George Wood).
translated three times, twice into English and once into 1858. A handbook of swimming and skating. London:
French. The French edition was translated into Spanish Routledge and Sons.
and Italian.) Contrary to general opinion, Thevenot
Forrest, George (pseudonym for Rev. John George Wood).
was not the orginator of the work but merely the
1863. A handbook of swimming. London: Routledge and
translator.]
Sons.
M’Iver, J. 1764. The art of swimming, with advice for bathing
Steedman, Charles. 1867. A manual of swimming, including
(Thevenot, trans.). London: John Lever.
bathing, plunging, diving, floating, scientific swimming,
Bernardi, de Oronzio. 1797. Vollstandiger Lehrbegriff der training, drowning and rescuing. Melbourne, Australia:
Schwimmkunst, auf neue Versuche uber die spezifische Henry Tolman Dwight.
Schwere des menschlichen Korpers gegrundet. Weimar:
[The illustrations are good and mark a distinct advance
(s.n.).
in the method of delineating the correct movements in
Muths, Guts. 1798. Kleines lehrbuch der Schwimmkunst zum swimming.]
selbstunterrichte (Manual for self-instruction in the art of
swimming). Weimar: (s.n.). Steedman, C. 1873. A manual of swimming, including bath-
ing, plunging, diving, floating, scientific swimming, train-
Strutt, Joseph. 1801. Glig-gamena angel-deod, or The sports ing, drowning and rescuing (English edition). London:
and pastimes of the people of England. London: White. Lockwood and Co.
[This oft-quoted work gives only one page (p. 66) on [Steedman’s book was first published in Melbourne in
swimming. This work outlasted three authors, five 1867 and again in London in 1873. Full references are
publishers, and the whole 19th century, with 10 edi- given below, including the names of collections where
tions spanning 1801 to 1903. Of course it dealt with copies of this rare book are housed.]
more than swimming, but the swimming discussion

--- Page 246 Text ---
Appendix 231
Steedman, Charles. A manual of swimming, including bath- Riley, Tom. 1903. Swimming. New York: (s.n.).
ing, plunging, diving, floating, scientific swimming, train-
Douglas, W.G. 1903. How to swim. New York: American
ing, drowning and rescuing by Charles Steedman
Sports.
Melbourne: H.T. Dwight, 1867. vxi, 270 p. front, plates
Sterrett, James H. 1903. How to swim. New York: American
16”.
Sports.
257687A. I. Swimming
NYPL December 14, 1924. [As well as covering the by-now standard topics of
NS 0883329 NN RPB swimming with various strokes, diving, and floating,
New York Public Library Sterrett’s book contains a chapter on modern life-sav-
Brown University, Providence ing and one for women and girl swimmers. Sterrett was
The State Library of Victoria, Melbourne, Australia known as “The Father of American Swimming.”]
Steedman, Charles. A manual of swimming, including bath- Thomas, Ralph. 1904. Swimming. London: Sampson Low,
ing, plunging, diving, floating, scientific swimming and Marston.
training, with a chapter on drowning, rescuing, and resusci-
[The nonspecific title hides the uniqueness of Thomas’s
tation. London, Lockwood and Co., 1873. xvl, 270 p. IX
book—a bibliography of swimming books in English,
pl. (incl. front.) 16.5cm. 1. swimming
German, French, and other European languages. The
NS 0883330 CtY PU MdBP book also discusses swimming and resuscitation and
Yale University includes a history of swimming and biographies of
University of Pennsylvania persons important in the field. Under the pseudonym
Peabody Institute, Baltimore of Hamst Olphar, Thomas also wrote The Handbook of
Henning Library, ISHOF, Fort Lauderdale Fictitious Names (1868).]
Thomas, Ralph. 1868. A Bibliographical List of Works on Fountain, P. 1904. The swimming powers of animals. Lon-
Swimming. London: s.n. don: (s.n.).
[Only 125 copies printed. This publication is of invalu- Daniels, C.M., Johnson, H., and Sinclair, A. 1907. How to
able service to any student of swimming lore.] swim and save life (Spalding’s Athletic Library, no. 21).
London: British Sports.
Beadle. 1869. Dime guide to swimming. New York: (s.n.).
Sinclair, Archibald. 1909. Swimming. London: Routledge
Wilson, William. 1876. The swimming instructor. Glasgow:
and Son.
(s.n.).
Sachs, Frank. 1912. The complete swimmer. London:
Wilson, W. 1883. The swimming instructor. London: Horace
Methuen.
Cox, The Field Office 346, Strand, London.
Daniels, C.M. 1919. Speed swimming. New York: American
[Wilson was also author of Swimming and Diving, and
Sports.
How to Save Life, The Bather’s Manual, etc. Swimming as
a science, training, the teaching of swimming, and the Handley, Louis de B. 1920. Swimming and watermanship.
rescue of life from drowning are the principal matters New York: MacMillan.
dealt with. The records and championship performances
Bachrach, William. 1924. The outline of swimming. Chicago:
to date are included.]
Author.
Andrews, Capt. W.D. 1889. Swimming and Life-saving.
Handley, Louis de B. 1927. Swimming for women. New
Toronto: s.n.
York: American Sports.
[Much of the work was written after blindness had
Sullivan, Frank. 1927. The science of swimming. New York:
come upon the author and is largely of an autobio-
American Sports.
graphical character. 136 pages. Numerous illustrations.]
Cureton, T.K. 1929. Outline of Pageant. Evolution of swim-
Sinclair, A., and Henry, W. 1893. Swimming. London:
ming. Philadelphia: P. Blakison’s Son.
Longmans, Green.
Handley, Louis de B., and Howcroft, W.J. 1929. Crawl-
[By 1912, this volume was in its seventh impression,
stroke swimming. London: E.J. Larby.
with four new editions and three reprinted editions.
Sinclair and Henry were honorary secretaries of the Weissmuller, John, and Bush, Clarence. 1930. Swimming
Royal Life-Saving Society, and Henry was one of the the American crawl. Boston: Houghton.
founders of FINA, the international governing body of
swimming.]

--- Page 248 Text ---
References
Absaliamov, T. 1984. Controlling the training of top level Carlile, F. 1956. The use of post-exercise heart rate counts
swimmers. In J.L. Cramer (ed.) How to develop Olympic in the prediction of maximum performance and as-
level swimmers. Finland: International Sports Media. sessing the progress of the swimmer in training. Re-
Anderson, O. 1999. A critical survey of the latest thinking port of the World Congress on Physical Education.
about the ins and outs of training. Peak Performance Melbourne: W.J. Barr. 102-104.
126:1-4. Carlile, F. 1963. Forbes Carlile on swimming. London: Pelham.
Armbruster, D.A. 1942. Competitive swimming and diving. Carlile, F. 1971. Where do we go from here? American
St. Louis: Mosby. Swimming Coaches Association’s first world clinic,
Bachrach, W. 1924. The outline of swimming. Chicago: Montreal, 1971. Swimming Technique 8(4):98-100, 119.
Author. Carlile, F. 1976. The philosophy of speed through endur-
Baldwin, K.M. 2000. Research in the exercise sciences: ance. International Swimmer 12(7):7-12.
Where do we go from here? Journal of Applied Physiol- Chapman, R.F., Stray-Gundersen, J., and Levine, B.J. 1998.
ogy 88:332-336. Individual variation in response to altitude training.
Banister, E.W., Morton, R.H., and Clarke, J.R. 1997. Clini- Journal of Applied Physiology 85:1448-1456.
cal dose-response effects of exercise. In J.M. Steinacker Chavoor, S. 1967. Sherm Chavoor speaks out on training.
and S.A. Ward (eds.) The physiology and pathophysiology Swimming World 8(10):5.
of exercise tolerance. New York: Plenum. 297-309.
Clarkson, A. 1990. Lanes of gold. Sydney, Australia: Lester-
Bannister, R. 1955. First four minutes. London: Putnam. Townsend.
Bell’s Life in Sydney and Sporting Review. 1846. First swim- Collins, G. 1934. The new magic of swimming. London:
ming race in Australia 3:32. William Heinemann.
Bergen, P. 1985. Executing a year training program. In T. Colwin, C. 1969. Cecil Colwin on swimming. London: Pelham
Welsh (ed.) American Swimming Coaches Association Books.
world clinic yearbook 1985. Fort Lauderdale, FL: Ameri- Colwin, C. 1984a. Fluid dynamics: Vortex circulation in
can Swimming Coaches Association. 195-204. swimming propulsion. In T.F. Welsh (ed.) American
Berger, J. 1982. Die zyklische Gestaltung des Trainings Swimming Coaches Association world clinic yearbook 1984.
prozesses unter besonderer Beruecksichtigung der Fort Lauderdale, FL: American Swimming Coaches
Periodiserung des Trainingsjahres (The cyclic estab- Association. 38-46.
lishment of the training process in special consider- Colwin, C. 1984b. Kinetic streamlining and the phenom-
ation of a cyclic subdivision of the training year). enon of prolonged momentum in the crawl swimming
Medizin und Sport 22:282-286. stroke. Swim Canada 11(1):12-15.
Birkeland, Kare I., and Hemmersbach, Peter. 1999. The Colwin, C. 1984c. Tethered swimming. Swim Canada
future of doping control in athletes. Sports Medicine 11(3):20-21.
28(1):25-33.
Colwin, C. 1985a. Essential fluid dynamics of swimming
Bompa, T.O. 1983. Theory and methodology of training: The propulsion. American Swimming Coaches Association
key to athletic performance. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt. Magazine 4:22-27.
Bompa, T.O. 1985. Theory and methodology of training. Colwin, C. 1985b. Practical application of flow analysis as
Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt. a coaching tool. American Swimming Coaches Associa-
Brasch, T. 1970. How did sports begin? A look at the origins of tion Magazine 5:5-8.
man at play. New York: David McKay. Colwin, C. 1987. Coaching the “feel of the water.” In T.F.
Brouha, L. 1945. Speficite de l’entrainement au travail Welsh (ed.), American Swimming Coaches Association
musculaire. Revue Canadienne Biologie 4:144. world clinic yearbook 1987. Fort Lauderdale, FL: Ameri-
Byrd, W. 1928. A journey to the Land of Eden and other papers. can Swimming Coaches Association. 87-98.
Edited by Mark van Doren. New York: Macy-Masius. Colwin, C. 1992. Swimming into the 21st century.
Champaign, IL: Leisure Press.
Capelli, C., Pendergast, D.R., and Termin, B. 1998. Ener-
getics of swimming at maximal speeds in humans. Colwin, C. 1998. The wave action breaststroke. Swimming
European Journal of Applied Physiology 78:385-393. Technique 25(2):12.
233

--- Page 249 Text ---
234 References
Colwin, C. 1999. Swimming dynamics: Winning techniques Craig, A.B., and Pendergast, D.R. 1979. Relationships of
and strategies. Chicago: Contemporary Press. stroke rate, distance per stroke, and velocity in com-
Colwin, C. 2000. From Red Army Team to Californian petitive swimming. Medicine and Science in Sports 11:278-
golden boy. Swimnews 27(7):20-21. 283.
Costill, D.I. 1987. Building a better mousetrap. Swimming Craig, A.B., Skeehan, P.L., Pawelczyk, J.A., and Boomer,
Technique 24(3):34-36. W.L. 1985. Velocity, stroke rate and distance per stroke
during elite swimming competition. Medicine and Sci-
Cottrell, L. (ed.). 1960. The concise encyclopaedia of archaeol-
ence in Sports and Exercise 17(6):625-634.
ogy. London: Hutchinson.
Cureton, T.K. 1934. How to teach swimming and diving (vol.
Counsilman, J.E. 1967. Problems: “Dirt” in interval train-
1). New York: Association Press.
ing. Swimming Technique 3(4):112-113.
Curry, I. 1975. Stroke length, stroke frequency and perfor-
Counsilman, J.E. 1968. The science of swimming. Englewood
mance. Swimming Technique 12(3):88, 91.
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cutmore, M. 1985. The pocket watch handbook. New York:
Counsilman, J.E. 1969. The role of sculling movements in
Arco Publishing.
the arm pull. Swimming World 10(12):6-7, 43.
Daland, P. 1984. Personal communication. June 12.
Counsilman, J.E. 1971. The application of Bernoulli’s
principle to human propulsion in water. In L. Lewillie Dalton, D. 1899. How to swim. New York: G.P. Putnam.
and J.P. Clarys (eds.) Proceedings: First international Daniels, C.M. 1919. Speed swimming. New York: American
symposium on biomechanics in swimming, waterpolo and Sports.
diving. Bruxelles: Universite Libre de Bruxelles Dawson B. 1987. Weissmuller to Spitz. Fort Lauderdale, FL:
Laboratoire de l’effort. 59-71.
International Swimming Hall of Fame.
Counsilman, J.E. 1975. Hypoxic and other methods of Deacon, J. 2000. Upsets down under. Maclean’s 113(40):35.
training evaluated. Swimming Technique 12(1):19-26.
Dellon, A., Curtis, R., and Edgerton, M. 1974. Re-educa-
Counsilman, J.E. 1977. Competitive swimming manual.
tion of sensation in the hand after nerve surgery and
Bloomington, IN: Author. repair. Plastic Reconstruction Surgery 53:297-305.
Counsilman, J.E. 1979. Biokinetics, the ultimate exercise. Digby [Dygbeio], E. 1587. De arte natandi libri duo, quorum
In R.M. Ousley (ed.) American Swimming Coaches Asso- prior regulas ipsius artis, posterior vero praxin
ciation world clinic yearbook 1979. Fort Lauderdale, FL: demonstrationemque continet. London: (s.n.).
American Swimming Coaches Association. 29-36.
East, D.E. 1970. Swimming: An analysis of stroke fre-
Counsilman, J.E. 1980. Hand acceleration patterns in quency, stroke length and performance. New Zealand
swimming strokes. Big Ten Biomechanics Conference. Journal of Health, Physical Education and Recreation 3:6-
Bloomington: Indiana University.
27.
Counsilman, J.E. 1986. Strength training, sprint training
Ellis, W. 1831. Hawaiian surfing in the 1820s: Polynesian
and speed assisted training for sprint swimmers. In
researches (volume 3). London: Fisher, Son, and Jack-
Swim 86 yearbook. Brisbane: Australian Swimming,
son.
Inc. and Australian Swimming Coaches Association.
Elyot, T. 1531. The boke named the governour. London:
1-16.
Thomas Berthelet.
Counsilman, J.E., and Brown, R.M. 1970. The role of lift in
Faith, H.D. 1912. The over-arm side stroke. Quoted in The
propelling the swimmer. In J.M. Cooper (ed.) Selected
complete swimmer by F. Sachs. London: Metheun. 140.
topics on biomechanics: Proceedings of the C.I.C. sympo-
sium on biomechanics. Chicago: Athletic Institute. 179- Finney, B., and Houston, J.D. 1996. Surfing: A history of the
188. ancient Hawaiian sport. Rohnert Park, CA: Pomegran-
ate Artbooks.
Counsilman, B.E., and Counsilman, J.E. 1991. The re-
sidual effects of training. Journal of Swimming Research Firby, H. 1975. Howard Firby on swimming. London: Pelham
7:5-12. Books.
Counsilman, B.E., and Counsilman, J.E. 1993. Problems Forsyth, S. 1939. A quick way to better swimming. (s.l):
with the physiological classification of endurance loads. Sundial Press.
American Swimming Magazine Dec.-Jan.:4-20. Foster, C. 1998. Monitoring training in athletes with refer-
Counsilman, J.E., and Wasilak, J.M. 1982. The importance ence to overtraining syndrome. Medical Science in Sports
of hand speed and acceleration in swimming the crawl and Exercise 30:1164-1168.
stroke. Swimming Technique 18(1):22-26. Fricker, P.A., McDonald, W.A., Gleeson, M.G., Flanagan,
Coyle, E.F., Hemmert, M.K., and Coggan, A.R. 1986. Ef- A., Pyne, D.B., and Clancy, R.L. 2000. A clinical snap-
fects of detraining on cardiovascular responses to ex- shot: Do elite swimmers experience more upper respi-
ercise: Role of blood volume. Journal of Applied Physiol- ratory illness than non-athletes? Journal of Clinical Ex-
ogy 60:95-99. ercise Physiology 2(3):155-158.

--- Page 250 Text ---
References 235
Gaines, P. 2000. Olympic advertising going for the gold. Kindermann, W. 1978. Regeneration und trainings Prozess
Financial Post July 17. in den Ausdauer—Sportarten aus medizinischer Sicht.
Gerschler, Rosskamm, and Reindell. 1964. Das Interval Leistungsport 4:354-357.
Training [Interval Training]. Congress on running. King, James. 1778. First description of surfing. (unedited
Duisberg: Deutscher Leichtatletiek. March. log). In J.C. Beaglehole (ed.) The voyage of the Resolu-
Gleeson, M., McDonald, W.A., Pyne, D.B., Cripps, A.W., tion and the Discovery, 1776-1780, vols. 1 and 2, 1967.
and Francis, J.L. et al. 1999. Salivary IgA levels and Cambridge: Hakluyt Society.
infection risk in elite swimmers. Medicine and Science in Kiphuth, R.J.H. 1942. Swimming. New York: Barnes.
Sports and Exercise 31:67-73.
Kiphuth, R.J.H. 1950. How to be fit. London: Nicholas
Handley, L. de B. 1918. Swimming and watermanship. New Kaye.
York: Macmillan.
Kiphuth, R.J.H., and Burke, H.M. 1951. Basic swimming.
Handley, L. de B. 1928. Swimming for women. New York: New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
American Sports Publishing.
Koshkin, I. 1985. The system and methods of Vladimir
Harre, D. 1982. Principles of sports training. Berlin: Sport Salnikov’s development, 1980-1984. In T. Welsh (ed.)
Verlag. 58. American Swimming Coaches Association world clinic
Hay, J.G., Guimaraes, A.C.S., and Grimston, S.K. 1983. A yearbook 1983. Fort Lauderdale, FL: American Swim-
quantitative look at swimming biomechanics. Swim- ming Coaches Association. 5-8.
ming Technique 20(2):11-17. Lanchester, F.W. 1907. Aerodynamics: Constituting the first
Helmstaedt, K. 2000a. German drug trials: The story told volume of a complete work on aerial flight. London: Con-
in court defies imagination. Swimnews No. 259, 27(6):20. stable.
Helmstaedt, K. 2000b. Two men who distorted the course Lavoie, J-M., and Montpetit, R.R. 1986. Applied physiol-
of sporting history. Swimnews No. 259, 27(6):21. ogy of swimming. Sports Medicine 3:165-189.
Holmer, G. 1972. Development in running. Track Tech- Leonard, J. 1999. FINA Extraordinary Congress on Dop-
nique 50:1584-1585. ing, Hong Kong, March 31. ASCA Newsletter 2000(8):22.
Hooper, S.L., Mackinnon, L.T., Howard, A., Gordon, R.D., Leonard, J. 2000. FINA’s third visit to China. ASCA News-
and Bachmann A.W. 1995. Markers for monitoring letter 2000(2):2, 4.
overtraining and recovery. Medicine and Science in Sports Lighthill, M.J. 1973. On the Weis-Fogh mechanism of lift
and Exercise 27:106-112. generation. Journal of Fluid Dynamics 60(pt. 1):1-17.
Horwill, F. 1982. Gerschler: The innovator. He was 30 Lilienthal, O. 1889. Der Vogelflug als Grundlage der
years ahead of his time. Athletics Weekly 36(38):33. Fliegekunst. Berlin: Ouldenberg.
Howard, S. 1849. The science of swimming as taught and London, J. 1911. The cruise of the Snark. New York:
practiced in civilized and savage countries. New York: Macmillan.
(s.n.).
London Times. 1844. The “Flying Gull” and “Tobacco.”
Jochums, D. 1982. The dissident’s view of distance freestyle April 22.
training. In R.M. Ousley (ed.) American Swimming
London Times. 1847. Report on Whitechapel baths. May 12.
Coaches Association world clinic yearbook 1982. Fort Lau-
derdale, FL: American Swimming Coaches Associa- London Times. 1899. Championship of 1899. September 18.
tion. 139-151. London Times. 1899. County of London long-distance pro-
Johnson, R. 1978. Organizing a season program. In R.M. fessional championship. September 18.
Ousley (ed.) American Swimming Coaches Association London Times. 1899. Ulph annual challenge cup competi-
world clinic yearbook 1978. Fort Lauderdale, FL: Ameri- tion for amateurs held in the sea at Yarmouth. Septem-
can Swimming Coaches Association. 129-143. ber 18.
Johnson, R. 1982. Tempo awareness training. In R.M. Long Beach Daily Telegram. 1922. Duke Kahanamoku, fa-
Ousley (ed.) American Swimming Coaches Association mous swimming champion gives exhibition on surf
world clinic yearbook 1982. Fort Lauderdale, FL: Ameri- board. July 31.
can Swimming Coaches Association. 39-54.
Maglischo, E.W. 1982. Swimming faster. Palo Alto, CA:
Karamcheti, K. 1966. Principles of ideal-fluid aerodynamics. Mayfield.
New York: Wiley.
Maglischo, E.W. 1983. A three-dimensional
Keast, D., and Morton, A.R. 1992. Long-term exercise and cinematographical analysis of competitive swimming
immune function. In R.R. Watson and M. Eisinger strokes. In R.M. Ousley (ed.) American Swimming
(eds.) Exercise and disease. Boca Raton: CRC Press. Coaches Association world clinic yearbook 1983. Fort Lau-
Kellermann, A. 1918. How to swim. New York: George H. derdale, FL: American Swimming Coaches Associa-
Doran Company. tion. 1-14.

--- Page 251 Text ---
236 References
Maglischo, E.W. 1985. Constructing workouts with en- C. Gore (ed.) Physiological tests for the elite athlete.
ergy system considerations. In T. Welsh (ed.) American Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. 372-382.
Swimming Coaches Association world clinic yearbook 1985.
Pyne, D.B., McDonald, W.A., Gleeson, M., Flanagan, A.,
Fort Lauderdale, FL: American Swimming Coaches
Clancy, R.L., and Fricker, P.A. 2001. Mucosal immu-
Association. 56-62.
nity, illness and competition performance in swim-
Magnus, O. 1555. Historia de gentibus septentrionalibus mers. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise
Romae [History of the northern people] Rome: Magno 33(3):348-353.
Gotho.
Pyne, D.B., and Telford, R.D. 1988. Classification of train-
Mason, B.R., and Fowlie, J.K. 1997. Competition analysis ing sessions. Excel 5(2):9-12.
for high performance swimming. Australian-Ocean
Pyne, D.B., and Telford, R.D. 1989. Classification of swim-
Swimming Professionals Convention. Broadbeach,
ming training sessions by blood lactate and heart rate
QLD. 65-70. responses. American Swimming Coaches Association
Matveyev, L. 1981. Fundamentals of sports training. Mos- Magazine February:7-9.
cow: Progress Publishers. 55-58. Rajki, B. 1956. The technique of competitive swimming.
Morehouse, L.E., and Miller, A.T. 1971. Physiology of exer- Budapest: Covina.
cise. St. Louis: Mosby.
Reichel, A. 1897. Swimming in two movements and its
Mujika, I., Busso, T., Lacoste, L., Barale, F., and Geyssant, superiority over the Pfuel and D’Argy methods with
A. et al. 1996. Modeled responses to training and taper three. In Myers Konversations-lexicon (vol. 15). Leipzig:
in competitive swimmers. Medical Science in Sports and (s.n.). 16.
Exercise 28:251-258.
Rowbottom, D.G., Keast, D., and Morton, A.R. 1998.
Murray, J., and Karpovich, P.V. 1956. Weight training in Monitoring and preventing of overreaching and over-
athletics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 141- training in endurance athletes. In R.B. Kreider, A.C.
144. Fry, and M.L. O’Toole (eds.) Overtraining in sport.
Muths, G. 1798. Kleines lehrbuch der Schwimmkunst zum Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics. 47-66.
selbstunterrichte (Manual for self-instruction in the art of Rushall, B.S. 2000. Swimming’s hall of shame. Spring Valley,
swimming). Weimar: (s.n.). CA: Sports Science Associates.
Nemecek, S. 2000. Who were the first Americans? Scien- Sachs, F. 1912. The complete swimmer. London: Methuen.
tific American 283(3):80-87.
Schleihauf, R.E. 1974. A biomechanical analysis of freestyle.
Neuburger, D. 2001. Personal communication. March 15. Swimming Technique 11(3):89-96.
Oppenheim, F. 1970. The history of swimming. North Hol- Schleihauf, R.E. 1977. Swimming propulsion: A hydrody-
lywood, CA: Swimming World. namic analysis. In R. Ousley (ed.) American Swimming
Pai, Y-C., Hay, J.G., and Wilson, B.D. 1984. Stroking tech- Coaches Association world clinic yearbook 1977. Fort Lau-
niques of elite swimmers. Journal of Sports Science derdale, FL: American Swimming Coaches Associa-
2(3):225-239. tion. 49-81.
Pursley, D. 2000. Observations from the 2000 Olympic Schleihauf, R.E. 1979. A hydrodynamic analysis of swim-
games. American Swimmer 2000(6):16. ming propulsion. In J. Terauds and E.W. Bedingfield
(eds.) International symposium of biomechanics. Volume 8:
Pyne, D.B. 1998. Performance and physiological changes
Swimming III. Baltimore: University Park Press. 70-
in elite swimmers during altitude training. Coaching
109.
and Sports Science Journal 3:42-48.
Schleusing, G., Rebentisch, J., and Schippel, C. 1964.
Pyne, D.B. 1999a. Endurance training: How much huff
Research on endurance and interval training. Medicine
and puff? Swimming Technique 35:16-20.
and sport (books I and II). Berlin: Verlag Volk and
Pyne, D.B. 1999b. Physiological testing of elite Australian Gesundheit, V.E.B.
swimmers. In F. Fu (ed.) Aquatic Sports Medicine in the
Selye, H. 1956. The stress of life. New York: McGraw-Hill.
New Century. Hong Kong: Association of Sports Medi-
Sharp, R.L., and Costill, D.L. 1989. Shaving a little time.
cine and Sports Science. 109-126.
Swimming Technique 26(3):10-13.
Pyne, D.B., and Gleeson, M. 1998. Effects of intensive
exercise training on immunity in athletes. International Sinclair, A., and Henry, W. 1885. The badminton book of
Journal of Sports Medicine 19:S183-S194. swimming. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.
Sinclair, A., and Henry, W. 1903. Swimming. London:
Pyne, D.B., Gleeson, M., McDonald, W.A., Perry, C., Clancy,
Longmans, Green, and Co.
R.L., and Fricker, P.A. 2000. Training strategies to main-
tain immunocompetence in athletes. International Jour- Stampfl, F. 1955. Franz Stampfl on running. London: Jenkins.
nal of Sports Medicine 21(suppl. 1):S51-S60. Steedman, C. 1867. A manual of swimming, including bath-
Pyne, D.B., Maw, G.J., and Goldsmith, W.M. 2000. Proto- ing, plunging, diving, floating, scientific swimming, train-
cols for the physiological assessment of swimmers. In ing, drowning and rescuing. Melbourne, Australia: (s.n.).

--- Page 252 Text ---
References 237
Steinacker, J.M., Lormes, W., Lehmann, M., and Troup, J.P. 1999. The physiology and biomechanics of
Alternburg, D. 1998. Training of rowers before world competitive swimming. Aquatic Sports Injuries and Re-
championships. Medical Science and Sports Medicine habilitation 18:267-285.
30:1158-1163. Twain, M. 1872. Roughing it. Chicago: F.G. Gilman.
Stix, G., and Fischetti, M. 2000. Game theory. Scientific
Ungerechts, B.E. 1983. A comparison of the movements of
American 11(3):6-9.
the rear parts of dolphins and butterfly-swimmers. In
Stray-Gundersen, J., and Levine, B.D. 1999. “Living high A.P. Hollander, P. Huijing, and G. de Groot (eds.)
and training low” can improve sea level performance International series on sports sciences. Volume 14: Biome-
in endurance athletes. British Journal of Sports Medicine chanics and medicine in swimming. Champaign, IL: Hu-
33:150-151. man Kinetics. 215-221.
Sullivan, F.J. 1928. The science of swimming. New York: van Aaken, E., and Berben, D. 1971. Speed through endur-
American Sports Publishing. ance. Swimming Technique January: 108-113.
Thevenot, M. 1696. L’art de nager. Paris: T. Moette. van Dam, C.P. 1988. In wind and water. The Sciences
Thevenot, M. 1699. The art of swimming. London: D. Brown, 28(1):37-39.
D. Midurnter, T. Leigh, and R. Knaplock. Vogel, S. 1998. Cats’ paws and catapults: Mechanical worlds of
Thierry, N. 1972. The world scene. Swimming Technique nature and people. New York: Norton. 224-225.
9(1):2-3, 10. Watson, R.P. 1873. Memoirs. Encyclopedia Britannica
Thierry, N. 1981. The breaststroke saga. AIPS Bulletin 22:772.
10(1):2. Weis-Fogh, T. 1973. Quick estimates of flight fitness in
Thomas, R. 1904. Swimming. London: Sampson Low, hovering animals including novel mechanisms for lift
propulsion. Journal of Experimental Biology 59(1):169-
Marston.
230.
Thornton, N. 1979. The Berkeley program. In R.M. Ousley
(ed.) American Swimming Coaches Association world clinic Weissmuller, J. 1930. Swimming the American crawl. Lon-
yearbook 1979. Fort Lauderdale, FL: American Swim- don: Putnam.
ming Coaches Association. 1-15. Wilson, W. 1883. The swimming instructor. London:
Horace.
Thornton, N. 1987. A few thoughts on training, or a closer
look at the path U.S. swimming seems to be currently Wynman, N. 1538. Colymbetes, sive de arte natandi et festivus
following. American Swimming Coaches Association et iucundus lectu (Dutch Copy). Ingolstadt, Bavaria:
Magazine Jan.-Feb.:11-14. (s.n.).
Thrum, T.G. (ed.). 1896. Hawaiian surf riding. From Thrums Young, P. 1990. Education is the key. Swim Canada 17(1):6-
Hawaiian annual 1896. 106-113. 7.

--- Page 254 Text ---
Index
A start 65–66
turn 66–67
adaptation to stress 138, 154
with trudgen kick 24
adduction of upper arm 47
Bannister, Roger 126
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 152
Barrowman, Mike 70, 221
age group swimming 202-203
Bath and Wash-Houses Act (1846) 187
caused upsurge in swimming worldwide 218
Bauer, Carl 202, 203
airfoil mechanism 76, 81, 83, 88, 94
Bauer, Sybil 17, 24-25, 222
altitude training 162-163
Beaurepaire, Sir Frank 200, 221
amateur athlete, definition of 193
Beaver, Dave 203
American crawl 18-23
Beckworth, Frederick Edward 192
American Swimming 200–204
Benjamin, H. 193
American Swimming Coaches Association
Bennett, John 198
(ASCA) 201-201, 216
Berendonk, Brigette 209
certification program 204
Berkoff, David 44
World Clinic 41
betting on swimming races 185, 191, 194
anabolic steroids 208, 212, 215, 216
Billington, David 193
anaerobic metabolism 145, 152-153, 174
biochemical reactions, within the muscle 151
anaerobic threshold. See lactate ventilatory
biokinetic swim bench 170
threshold
biomechanics 33–48
ancient civilizations and swimming 4–5
birds and insects, flying characteristics of 94–95
angle of attack 36, 37, 86, 95, 99
Birkeland, Kare I. 216
angle of pitch. See angle of attack
blood doping 214, 216
Armbruster, David 26, 95
body balance 52, 44
Art of Swimming, The 7
body proportions 43
Asian Games, Hiroshima, (1994) 212
body roll, the 41, 45
athletic scholarships 203
body shape and streamlining 99–100
Australian crawl
Borg, Arne 22, 221
in 1900s 15, 16
boundary layer 78, 80
in 1950s 23
Boyle, Charlotte 17
Australian Institute of sport xii,159–160
breaststroke 67–69
Australian swimming
in 16th and 17th century 5
at the Olympic Games 200
in 19th century 5–6, 25
Cavill family, the 5, 16, 198, 199, 217
in early 20th century 6, 10, 25–28,
early British influence and 198–199
in mid 20th century 27-30, 219–220
first organized swimming race 197
underwater swimming and 28–29
wave technique and 67–69
B
buoyancy, 43, 44, 45
Bachrach, William 17, 18, 26 butterfly
back crawl. See backstroke invention and development of 18, 30–31
backstroke 18, 24–25, 219 key points of 59
Bauer style of 17, 24–25 modern technique 56–58
Hebner style of 219 start 59–60
key points of 63–65 turn 60–61
Kiefer style of 25 butterfly-breaststroke 28
modern technique of 61–65 Byrd, William 13
239

--- Page 255 Text ---
240 Index
C broken tempo swimming 23
biokinetic swim bench 170
Cairns, T. 193
curvilinear path of pull observed by 33, 34–35
Carlile, Forbes
hand speed and acceleration 39
on failing adaptation 127
interval training 129
on interval training 126, 129, 220
lift propulsion and 33, 34
on speed through endurance 129, 131–132
super-adaptation tapering method 148
on the taper 146
use of the camera as a scientific instrument 79
Catlin, George 14
creatine phosphate (CP) 152
Cavill, Arthur (“Tums”) 199
Cusack, Arthur 27
Cavill, Fred (“Professor”) 15, 198,
cyclic training 220
Cavill, Percy 199
Cavill, Richard (“Dick”) 15, 16, 199, 200, 217, 221
D
Cavill, Sydney 15, 199
Chadwick, Edwin 187 Daland, Peter 221
Charlton, Andrew (“Boy”) 200, 221 age-group program 202–203
Chavoor, Sherman interval training 129
interval training 129 training methods 220
training methods 220 Daniels, Charles M. 18, 201, 221
China and performance enhancing drugs 212–215 Davenport, Horace 193
Chinese Olympic and World Swimming Medals Davis, Syd 15
211 De Arte natandi 7, 8
Chinese Swimming Association (CSA) 212 de la Perouse, Captain 12
clap-fling-ring mechanism 95–96 dehydrotestosterone (DTH) 212, 214
Cleveland, Dick 126 Dellon, A. Lee 224
Cole, Winston 191 Dennis, Clare 200
Collins, Gilbert 26 Derbyshire, J. H. 192, 199
Colymbetes 7, 24 Digby, Everard 7–8
commercialization, effect on distance training diuretic masking agents 203, 212
155. See also sponsorship triamterine 213
competition analysis 155–157 distance per stroke, 22, 41, 220. See also tempo
concept formation awareness
tactile and visual impressions in 113 dolphin kick 31, 94, 95, 100, 219
concentration under pressure 218 dolphin-butterfly stroke 30
continuous propulsion, concept of 12, 15, 17 doping control, future of 215
Corson, George 200 doping trials, Berlin 208, 209–210
Costill, David 38 doping. See drugs, performance enhancing
Cotton, Professor Frank, 126, 146 double overarm stroke. See trudgen stroke
Crabbe, Clarence (“ Buster”) 205, 221 drag
Craig, Albert 38 coefficient of 37
crawl stroke, the forces 78
body rotation and 22, 36 form 39, 45
breathing and head turning in 14, 53 friction 39, 45
changing position of the elbow, in 53 induced 84–85
key points of 52 interaction with lift 33, 34, 35, 36, 37
kick 18, 23, 54 propulsion 88, 96
modern technique of 50-52 wave 31, 39
new paradigms 42 drownings 186-187
Polynesian origin of 13–14, 218 drug tests positive by country 215
start 54, 55 drugs, performance enhancing xi, xiii, 207-216.
timing in 52-53 See also China; East Germany
turn 55 Dunham, George 193
Counsilman, James E. Durack, Fanny 200, 2
Bernoulli’s principle 34, 81, 82

--- Page 256 Text ---
Index 241
E Fartlek training 127–129
Firby, Howard 219
East Germany
fish tail swimming 31, 44
drugs, performance enhancing 207, 208, 211–
fitness, loss of competitive 154
212
flexibility 43
Ederle, Gertrude 17, 202, 222
flight
eddy resistance. See separation of flow
flapping (or oscillating) 94
Elyot, Thomas 7
heavier-than-air 81
energy
fling-ring mechanism 93, 96–97
basic compounds of 152, 153
flow shapers, the use of 108,114
demands, met by specific training methods 153
flow (hydrodynmics)
metabolism 152–153
around a swimmer’s body 44
systems, relative contribution to various events
circulation 77, 81–84, 88, 94
152–153
nonsteady in nature 89, 93, 94–95
Epstein, Charlotte (“Eppy”) 17, 202
oncoming 45, 100
erythropoietin (EPO) 215, 216
reactions 75–89
Essick, Ray 228
resistance 37, 45
Evans, Janet 222
separation 78, 99, 101
Evans, W. 193
steady and nonsteady 76, 77, 86, 87
Ewald, Manfred 207
velocity 77, 86
exercise, duration and intensity of 171–172
flow, the (in teaching the feel of the water)
analysis as coaching tool 97–99
F
anticipation, control and mastery of 107 116–
Faith, H. D. 9–10 120
Farmer, George 16 manipulation of 99–100, 107, 109, 111, 116–120
fat, as an energy compound 152 shaping of 99–100, 101
fatigue 161–162 flutter kick 10, 13, 17, 219
accumulated and reduction of 154 foil type lift 93
feel of the water, the Frank, Werner, 209
descriptions used in teaching 109 Franklin, Benjamin 7
enhanced when swimmer reverts to traditional Friesel, Paul 31
swimsuit 224 frog kick 5, 12, 26
sensitizing nerve endings 116–120 Frolich, Gus 127
specific drills in learning 115 frontal resistance 39
Federation Internationale de Natation Amateur. Froude number 44
See FINA functional shaping of hand and arm 104–105
Ferguson, Fraysher 126
FINA G
amateur law 228
Gaines, Paul 227
birth of xii, 194
Gallagher, Harry 127, 220
delegations to China 213–216
Galligan, Claire 202
drugs and 208, 212–216
Gambril, Don 220
East German world records and 208
Gardner, Harry 10
Extraordinary Congress on Doping Hong
gas chromatography 216
Kong, March 1999 215
Gathercole, Terry 228
International Swimming Technical Committee
genetic factors, athletic improvement limited by
(ISTC) 29
154
rules and
German Democratic Republic. See East Germany
breaststroke 29, 219–220
Gerschler, Woldemar 126-127, 132–133
butterfly 219
glycogen 152
dolphin kick 31
Gould, Shane, 129, 222
swimming suits 223
government funding of athletes 227
underwater pushoff 56
grass roots level swimmers 225

--- Page 257 Text ---
242 Index
Greasely, S. W. 193 injury and training concerns 154
Griffen, H. H. 193 International Olympic Committee (IOC) 28,
Gurr, Henry (Harry) 10, 193 31, 208, 219, 227
Guthrie, Frank 24, 126, 127 interval training xii, 139, 155, 220
1950s and 126, 129
H criticism of 130
fast method of 137, 139–140, 141, 176–177
Hackett, Grant xi, 43, 54, 226
Gerschler’s method of 132–133
Haines, George 203
possible adverse effects of 134–135
interval training and 129
slow method of 137, 139, 140
training methods and 220
various applications of 141
Hall Jr., Gary 42,44
iron and transport serum 216
hand, the
dual function of 93
J
entry 111, 112
common errors in 112 Japanese
ship drill and 100, 114 body roll 20, 21
as a foil 92, 110 crawl 22, 205
hand-forearm rotation 88, 94, 108 swimming 204–205
hand-wrist posture in crawl 52, 101–105 swimming schools 186
Handley, Louis de Breda 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 41 swimming success of the 205
Handy, H. J. (“Jam”) 20, 24 Jarvis, J. A. 192
Hanson, Howard 29 Jochums, Dick 170
Harris, Gerald F. 38 Johnson, Dave 212
Hashizume, Shiro 204 Johnson, E. D. 190
Hastert, Dennis 204 Johnson, Ron 41, 170
head, the
position of 53 K
shape influences bow-wave 45
Kahanamoku, Duke 13, 15,18,201, 221
turning mechanism of 53
Kaplan, Lester 31
Healy, Cecil 19, 200
Kaufman, Beth 202, 203
Hearn, George 194
Kellermann, Annette 18, 223
Hebner, Harry 219
Kenworthy, Harold 192
Helmstaedt, Karen 209, 210,
Kiefer, Adolph 25, 219, 221
Hemmersbach, Peter 216
Kieran, Barney 18, 200, 221
Herford, Sam 23
kinetic energy 89, 93, 102
high elbow 47, 48, 53
Kiphuth, Robert J. H. xii, 22-23, 205, 218
history of competitive swimming xii, 3-30
Krayzelburg, Lenny 64
Hoeppner, Manfred 207
Holm, Eleanor 17, 202, 222
L
Holmer, Gosta 127–129, 130
Hounslow, Samuel 192, 193 Lackie, Ethel 17
Howard, Sidney 12 lactate ventilatory threshold 145, 174–175
huki, the 13 Lane, Fred (“Freddy”) 199, 200, 217, 221
human growth hormone (HGH) 215 Lavender Bay, Sydney, Australia 15, 199
human swimming and propulsion in nature Le Moyne, Harry 201
93–96, 100–101 leg action, in early crawl stroke 6, 10, 15
hydroplaning 20 letter of guarantee signed by Chinese swimmers
Hyman, Misty 44 pledging to follow doping rules 213-214
leverage against water resistance 47
I Lewis, Charles 192
lift 33, 34
individual swimmer, training of 154, 160
coefficient 36

--- Page 258 Text ---
Index 243
generating mechanisms in nature 89, 95 O
heavier-than-air flight 81–83, 86
oath of secrecy, signed by East German athletes 208
interaction with drag 33, 34, 35, 36, 37
ocean surfing 12
Lister, W. H. 192
Olympic Games
London Swimming Club 191
Amsterdam 1928 17, 26
long-course swimming 226
Antwerp 1920 17
long-distance races 188
Berlin 1936 25
Lord, Alice 17
London 1908 24
lunate or crescent shape 101, 102–103
Los Angeles 1932 200
Lyons, Nancy 200
Melbourne 1956 xii, 28, 31, 200
Paris 1924 17
M
revival of, in Athens, (1869) 222
Maclean, Alister 197 Sydney 2000 42, 200, 226, 209
macrocycles, in training 154 O’Neill, Susie, xi, 222
Maglischo, Ernest 38 oral turinabol 207
Magnus effect 82–83 oscillating wing flight. See flapping flight
Magnus, Olaus 7 out of competition testing of athletes 208
Marshall, John 126, 200 outward sweep of arms in swimming strokes 103
Mason, Bruce 155 overload, based on stimulus, response and
massage, effects of 149 adaptation 154
Manual of Swimming, The 14, 16, 124, 198, 206
mass spectrometry 216 P
Meany, Helen 17
pace clock 222
mesocycles in training 154
pace of the race, training for 178–179
metabolism of energy 152–153
pace, variation of 127
metabolism 161
penalties for doping 216
microcycles in training 154
Pendergast, David 38
momentum 42, 44, 52, 53, 100, 206
peptide hormones 216
prolonged 39–40
periodization 154, 156
Moras, Karen 129
Perkins, Kieren 221, 226
Morris, T. 191
Pewters, George 192
motion picture camera 79, 204
photography used to study swimming strokes
motor learning, the role of touch in 112
49–50
multilevel national programs 205
physical differences between athletes 43–44
muscular contraction, chemistry of 152, 174
physiological research, in international swimming
Myers, Henry 30, 219
161
physiological responses, specificity of 154
N
physiological testing 159–160
Naber, John, 221 Popov, Alex xi, 42, 44, 45, 221, 225
National Swimming Society (1837) 186, 192 Pound, Richard 227
national swimming program concept xii, 201, power-weight ratio 44
204 pressure
neuromuscular patterns 151 interpreting sensations of moving 107, 116–120
New York Athletic Club 17, 18, 200 differences 76
New York Women’s Swimming Association patterns, how the hand creates 110
(NYWSA) 200 primitive cultures and swimming
New Zealand Amateur Swimming Association Ceylon, in 15
194 Easter Island, in 12
nonautologic blood doping 216 Mandans 13–14
Nurmi, Paavo 129 Pacific Islands, in 10, 13, 14, 15, 16
nutrition, importance of in training 168 Solomon Islands, in 15, 16
Nuttall, J. 9, 193 South America, in 4, 10

--- Page 259 Text ---
244 Index
prize money 214, 225, 226 scientific research 220, 227
professional swimmers 192, 193, 225 scissors kick 9, 11, 15, 20
corporate endorsement and sponsorship 226 selective method of applying the workload,
professionalism 192 search for 144–145
professors of swimming 189 sense of touch, heightening of 107, 108, 116–120
propellers 34, 81, 86 sensory perception 107
propelling instrument, the arm as a 107 interference with 224
propulsion separation of the flow 99
basic concepts of 75–77 Serpentine River, London 186, 192, 199
circulation and 81–82 Shadowgram, 88
lift and drag interaction 36–38 Shanghai Swimming Association (SSA) 213, 214
nature and Shaving down 39
bird flight 93–94 short course swimming (25 meters) 225
fish and marine animals 95 side thrust. See lift
insects 94, 95–96 sidestroke xi, 4, 8–10, 13
unorthodox 77, 81, 95–97 English overarm 9–10, 12, 14
psychological barriers 218 underarm 9
public schools in England and swimming 188, 189 Sieg, Jack 31, 95, 219
public swimming pools 186–188 Skelton, Bob 17
Pursley, Dennis 226 skill 42
Pyne, David xii, 151,-165 soaring and gliding flight 94, 103
specificity, of training 138, 153
Q speed through endurance 131–132
Spence, Walter 30
questions asked by stroke pioneers 17–18
Spitz, Mark 17, 201, 221
sponsorship 227
R
sport science and medicine, support networks
race pace, simulation in training 178–179 involved in 159
racing distances standardized 188 Stack, Allan 25
Rademacher, Erich 26, 30, 221 Stampfl, Franz 126
Rajki, Bela 27–28 standardization of racing distances 188, 222
Redman, J. Sr 197 Stasi files 208
Redman, W. Jr 197 steroid abuse, signs of 211
regenerative periods in training, need for 181 Statute of Limitations 209
Reindell, Herbert 130 Steedman, Charles 5, 8, 14, 192, 198–199
relaxation 218 Stevens , “Professor” 189, 192
resistance 10, 45, 75, 78 stimulants 216
Riggen, Aileen 17, 202 stopwatch, history of the 3, 185, 190–191, 222
Robertson, W. W. 30 Strachan, John 186
Robinson’s Baths 197 streamlines 76, 77
Royal Humane Society 199 streamlining 41, 44, 53
Royal Life Saving Society 188–189 stroke correction, facilitated by slow endurance
Rushcutters Bay , Sydney Harbor 218 training 153
stroke effectiveness, associating ideal flow
S reactions with 109
stroke length and frequency 41. See also tempo
Sachs, Frank 10, 25 awareness
Schaeffer, E. Carroll 201 stroke mechanics, gradual development of 218
Schleihauf, Robert 33, 34, 36 subdued kicking, in long distance races 54
Schlueter, Walter 126, 219 supplementary land training 126, 218
Schubert, Mark 203, 219 Suzuki, Daichi 44, 204
science swimmers of the 20th century. See top swimmers,
intuition and 205 20th century, male and female
future directions in swimming 165 Swimming Association of Great Britain 193–194

--- Page 260 Text ---
Index 245
Swimming Into the 21st Century xi sprint 170–173
Swimming Instructor, The 10, 206 steady state 130
swimming and track training methods, taper, the 145–148
comparative appraisal of 134 tethered or sprint-resisted 143–144
swimming flume 223 training, planning a program
swimming match, first 186 annual cycles, number of 154
swimming pools, evolution of xii, 3, 188, 217, 220 basic taper plan 148
swimming reports, first 186, 187, 191–192 chemical changes in muscle 173–174
swimming suits, natural versus equipment suits development of program 167
223–225 intensity of 157
Sydney Morning Herald, report from pool direct monitoring training workloads 156
to the worldwide web 226 monotony and strain, effects of 158
Sydney Referee 15 muscle hypertrophy 138
need for regenerative periods 181
T number of sessions per week 181
outline of annual program 179–180
tactile and visual impressions in teaching 113
overtraining, effects of 161–162
Taguchi, Nobutaka 204
principle considerations of 146, 153
Talbot, Don 220, 228
progressive overload principle in 137, 138
talent selection 43–44
reversibility of 154
tall swimmers
specificity of 138
advantages of 43
varying training intensities 177–178
bow wave and 45
work time at maximal effort 175–176
taper, the. See training
training aids and equipment 222-223
television coverage 218, 225, 227
transferrin receptors 216
tempo awareness 41
transitional phases of the stroke 100, 101, 103-104
testing, of swimmers 155
trudgen stroke xi, 4, 10–12, 14
testosterone/epitestosterone ratio 213
trudgen-crawl 20
tethered swimming 223
Tsuruta, Yoshiyuki 205, 221
Thevenot, Melchisedec 7–8
Turrell, Jenny 129
Thierry, N. J. 29
Tyers, J. H. 9, 193
Thomas, Ralph 8, 190
Thornton, G. 197
U
Thornton, Nort 129, 170–173
Thorpe, Ian xi, 42, 43, 44, 45, 221 ulnar-flexion of the wrist 102-103
thrust. See propulsion underwater observation of swimmers 223
Title IX 203–204 underwater swimming 44. See also fishtail
top swimmers, 20th century, male and female swimming
221, 222 unsteady flow. See nonsteady flow
track athletes, training of 126–132 United States
influence on swimming training 127–134 collegiate swimming 202
training, specific methods high school swimming 202
aerobic and anaerobic 170–173 Olympic swimming medals (1972–2000) 201
alternating easy and hard training days 145 professional coaches integral part of swimming
formats to produce specific effects 169 program 228
periodization of 137, 144 university swimming 203-204
practicing negative splits 143 United States Swimming (formerly AAU) 202
pyramid formats 142
repetition 137, 139, 140 V
reversed individual medley 220
van Aaken, Ernst 129-132
sets
van den Hoogenbrand, Pieter xi, 42, 44
broken 141, 142
videography, underwater 35, 46, 116
descending 141
viscosity 78, 80
permutation 142
Victorian England champion swimmers xii
straight 141

--- Page 261 Text ---
246 Index
velocity 76, 81 Wilson, William 10, 206
gradient 80 windsprints xii
visualization 79, 218 Women’s swimming
Vortex, and flow reactions weight training and 126
bound 82, 83, 85, 94, 95 Title IX and 203
description of 97–98 Antwerp Olympics (1920) and 202
significance of 97–99 Women’s Swimming Association (WSA) work-to-
trailing or tip 84, 85, 88, 98 rest ratio xii, 220, 222
vortex organized system 86 World Championships xi
vortices, generating and shedding of 92–-93, 94, World Cup Circuit 225, 226
97, 99 world long-course records 1957–2000 195
World Long-Course Swimming Championships,
W 1st, Belgrade, (1973) 194
World Short-Course Swimming Championships,
Wagner effect 87
1st, Majorca (1993) 194
Wainwright, Helen 17, 202
World Swimming Championships, 1st (pre-FINA)
Waldniel School of training 129
St. Kilda, Melbourne (1858) 198
warm up, the 148-149
World Swimming Coaches Association 216
water, under the action of forces xi, xii, 10
world short-course swimming records (1991–
water pressure, associated with phase of the
2000) 196
stroke 108, 116-120
Wylie, Mona 200
Watson, R. P. 11, 12
Wynman, Nicolaus 7
wake turbulence 98
wave making 45-46
Y
resistance to human swimming 44
Webb, Matthew 197 Yamanaka, Tsuyoshi 204
Weissmuller, John 17, 18, 200, 218, 221 YMCA 200, 202
weight belt, use of 47
weight training for swimmers 126, 169 Z
Werner, Gunner 212
Zatopek, Emil 129
Wickham, Alick 15,16
ZERV Central Investigations Office for Govern-
Whitechapel Baths 187
ment and Reunification Crimes 29
Wiggens, Al 126

--- Page 262 Text ---
About the Author
Cecil M. Colwin is a legend among swimming United States. In 1993 he was inducted into the
coaches. He has had a distinguished interna- International Swimming Hall of Fame. In 2002
tional coaching career in which he developed Colwin was awarded the Palagon Award.
Olympic medalists, world-record holders, and Colwin has authored hundreds of articles,
national champions. Colwin is also acknowl- papers, and books on competitive swimming,
edged as one of the swimming world’s most and he continues to serve as a consultant to
influential coach educators and historians. His administrators, coaches, and swimmers world-
indelible mark on the sport spans from pio- wide. He is a regular contributor to several
neering swim training in South Africa to coach- swimming magazines, including Swimnews,
ing South African national and international Swimming World, Swimming Technique, and The
competitors. Colwin is acknowledged as a dy- American Swimmer. Known as one of the swim-
namic lecture-room and pool-deck clinician ming world’s most inspirational lecturers, he
with a gift for vivid imagery and the ability to has addressed the World Swimming Coaches’
analyze and simplify complex techniques. Conference on several occasions and has given
A former national technical director of Cana- hundreds of lectures and clinic presentations
dian swimming, Colwin was instrumental in worldwide. Since 1995 Colwin has served as a
researching, designing, and implementing Ca- member of the World Swimming Coaches’
nadian Swimming’s National Play for the 1976 Association’s Anti-Doping Committee. He is
Montreal Olympic Games as well as the Cana- also the founder of Cecil Colwin’s Interna-
dian National Apprenticeship Program for tional Swim Camps, a leading stroke clinic and
training coaches in all sports. Colwin has also training experience for swimmers and coaches
designed and conducted coaching certification from many countries.
courses for Level III coaches in the United Colwin and his wife, Margaret, live in Ottawa,
States and Australia. In 1985 and 1986, he re- Ontario, where he pursues a variety of interests
ceived the American Swimming Coaches including portrait painting, videography,
Association’s (ASCA) certificate of excellence cartooning, reading, weight training, and lis-
for outstanding coaching achievement in the tening to music.
247

--- Page 264 Text ---
You’ll find
other outstanding
swimming resources at
www.humankinetics.com
In the U.S. call
1-800-747- 4457
Australia .....................................08 8372 0999
Canada........................................800-465-7301
Europe ........................... +44 (0) 113 255 5665
New Zealand .........................0064 9 448 1207
HUMAN KINETICS
The Premier Publisher for Sports & Fitness
P.O. Box 5076 • Champaign, IL 61825-5076 USA

--- OCR from Page 264 Image 1 ---
YO
other outs
swimming resol

www.humankinetics.c
He fe In the U.S. call
hy, 1-800-747-4¢

EULODG ....cscseseessseeseeeseees +44 (0) 113
New Zealand ........cccccceeeeeeeee 0064 9

Ge Kal HUMAN KINETICS

Th. Poe ee 7 TF, be ek ew Lee Owe ete O TF