
--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
Gomplete Guide to
PRIMARY SWIMMING

Jeaching strokes and
Skills In Q Safe and fun
environment

--- Page 2 Text ---
This page intentionally left blank.

--- Page 3 Text ---
Complete Guide to
Primary
Swimming
John Lawton
Human Kinetics

--- Page 4 Text ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lawton, John, 1952-
Complete guide to primary swimming / John Lawton.
p. cm. -- (Complete guides.)
1. Swimming--Training. I. Title.
GV837.7.L97 2013
797.21--dc23
2012044935
ISBN-10: 1-4504-0153-8 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-1-4504-0153-1 (print)
Copyright © 2013 by John Lawton
This book is copyrighted under the Berne Convention. All rights are reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of private study, research, criticism, or review, as permitted
under the Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
electrical, chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior written permission of the publisher.
Notice: Permission to reproduce the following material is granted to instructors and agencies who have purchased Complete Guide to Primary Swimming: pp. 18 and 28. The reproduction
of other parts of this book is expressly forbidden by the above copyright notice. Persons or agencies who have not purchased Complete Guide to Primary Swimming may not reproduce
any material.
The web addresses cited in this text were current as of November 28, 2012, unless otherwise noted.
Acquisitions Editors: John Dickinson and Scott Wikgren; Developmental Editor: Ray Vallese; Assistant Editor: Derek Campbell; Copyeditor: Joanna Hatzopoulos Portman;
Permissions Manager: Dalene Reeder; Graphic Designer: Nancy Rasmus; Graphic Artist: Denise Lowry; Cover Designer: Keith Blomberg; Photograph (cover): © Human Kinetics;
Photographs (interior): © Human Kinetics, unless otherwise noted; chapter-opening photo © Photodisc/Getty Images; photo on p. 16 © Eyewire; Photo Asset Manager: Laura Fitch;
Visual Production Assistant: Joyce Brumfield; Photo Production Manager: Jason Allen; Art Manager: Kelly Hendren; Associate Art Manager: Alan L. Wilborn; Illustrations:
© Human Kinetics; Printer: United Graphics
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics Australia: Human Kinetics, 57A Price Avenue, Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
Website: www.HumanKinetics.com 08 8372 0999
United States: Human Kinetics, P.O. Box 5076, Champaign, IL 61825-5076 e-mail: info@hkaustralia.com
800-747-4457 New Zealand: Human Kinetics, P.O. Box 80, Torrens Park, South Australia 5062
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com 0800 222 062
Canada: Human Kinetics, 475 Devonshire Road Unit 100, Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5 e-mail: info@hknewzealand.com
800-465-7301 (in Canada only)
e-mail: info@hkcanada.com
Europe: Human Kinetics, 107 Bradford Road, Stanningley, Leeds LS28 6AT, United
Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com E5289

--- Page 5 Text ---
Contents
How to Use This Book vii
Unit 1 Planning 1
Outcome 1 Teaching From the Poolside or in the Water 7
Developing a Whole-School Approach 2 Working Effectively With a Group 8
Organisation and Delivery 2 Evaluating Your Programme and Planning for the Future 9
Health and Safety 3 Looking Beyond the School Day 9
Who Can Teach Swimming? 6 Where to Start: A Few Guiding Thoughts 9
Additional Adult Support 7 Developing Your Whole-School Swimming Guidance
Document 11
Unit 2 Preparation and Familiarisation 13
Outcomes 13 Outcome 2.2 15
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 14 Be introduced to the pool environment and the teaching
staff.
Outcome 2.1 15
Outcome 2.3 16
Be aware of the processes and procedures related to
attending a swimming lesson and have the opportunity Complete a land-based evacuation procedure.
to clarify any concerns.
Preswimming Checklist 17
Worksheet 1: Let’s Think About Swimming 18
iii

--- Page 6 Text ---
Contents
Unit 3 Starting to move 19
Outcomes 19 Outcome 3.3 25
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 20 Be comfortable participating in various games and fun
activities related to early movement.
Outcome 3.1 21
Unit 3 Checklist 27
Know and be able to explain the safety requirements
Worksheet 2: Pool Safety 28
of the pool as appropriate to the lesson.
Outcome 3.2 22
a. Be able to enter and exit the water safely; be able to
move around the pool with feet on the bottom and with
confidence.
b. Be able to carry out evacuation procedures safely and
within an appropriate length of time.
Unit 4 Face in the water 29
Outcomes 29 Outcome 4.3 36
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 30 Be introduced to aspects related to water safety away
from the pool environment.
Outcome 4.1 31
Unit 4 Checklist 37
Be comfortable putting the face in the water.
Outcome 4.2 33
a. Be introduced to the initial stage of aquatic breathing
and be comfortable with water in the mouth.
b. Be introduced to the benefits of exercise.
Unit 5 Learning to Float 39
Outcomes 39 Outcome 5.2 44
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 40 Be able to combine floating on the front and back
showing rotation and balance, and be able to develop
Outcome 5.1 41
floating sequences.
Be comfortable floating on the front and back, and be
Unit 5 Checklist 46
able to regain the standing position.
iv

--- Page 7 Text ---
Contents
Unit 6 Submersion and aquatic Breathing 47
Outcome 47 Outcome 6.1 48
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 48 Be comfortable going under the water and be able to
show controlled inhalation and exhalation over a
period of time.
Unit 6 Checklist 51
Unit 7 gliding and Developing the Body Position 53
Outcomes 53 Outcome 7.2 58
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 54 Be able to glide on the front and the back combined
with kicking and rotation.
Outcome 7.1 55
Outcome 7.3 59
Be able to glide on the front with the face in the water
and the arms at the sides and extended, and be able to Be able to glide on the back combined with kicking
float on the back with the arms at the sides. and with sculling action.
Unit 7 Checklist 61
Unit 8 Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl 63
Outcomes 63 Outcome 8.3 74
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 64 Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills
appropriate to this stage of development.
Outcome 8.1 65
Outcome 8.4 76
Be able to swim on the back with the legs kicking up
and down and the arms performing an alternating Describe each stroke covered in this unit, and suggest
over-the-water recovery. ways to bring about improvement.
Outcome 8.2 68 Unit 8 Checklist 76
Be able to swim on the front with the legs kicking up
and down and the arms performing an alternating
over-the-water recovery.
v

--- Page 8 Text ---
Contents
Unit 9 Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly 77
Outcomes 77 Outcome 9.3 90
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 78 Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills
appropriate to this stage of development.
Outcome 9.1 79
Unit 9 Checklist 94
Perform a basic breaststroke with control.
Outcome 9.2 85
Perform a basic butterfly with control.
Unit 10 Further Development of the Four major Strokes and aquatic Skills 95
Outcomes 95 Outcome 10.1d 103
Linking to the National Curriculum Requirements 96 Swim butterfly over longer distances showing good
control.
Outcome 10.1a 97
Outcome 10.2 105
Swim backstroke over longer distances showing good
control. Be able to combine strokes and skills to perform aquatic
circuits.
Outcome 10.1b 100
Unit 10 Checklist 106
Swim front crawl over longer distances showing good
Further Development 106
control.
Outcome 10.1c 102
Swim breaststroke over longer distances showing good
control.
Appendix 107
About the Author 110
vi

--- Page 9 Text ---
How to Use This Book
C
omplete Guide to Primary Swimming is designed to support the especially helpful for schools introducing swimming into the curriculum
teaching of swimming in schools. The model for teaching swimming for the first time. A guidance checklist provides an easy mechanism to
in UK schools varies considerably. Some schools use external quali- ensure that all the major aspects have been considered.
fied swimming teachers, some use a combination of external qualified Each subsequent unit contains easy-to-follow, sequential activities
swimming teachers and schoolteachers and some use schoolteachers supported by teaching tips. Each unit has a number of clearly identi-
only. Although this book is targeted towards schoolteachers with limited fied outcomes and a checklist to ensure that all the key skills have been
knowledge and experience in the teaching of swimming, experienced achieved before moving to the next unit. Because the activities build on
swimming teachers in schools and recreational settings can benefit skills developed in previous units, your swimming programme should
from the easy-to-follow structure that this book provides and that is follow the units in the order listed. This logical and progressive struc-
sometimes missing from learn-to-swim programmes. ture ensures that swimmers develop a range of skills that underpin and
The importance of learning to swim is widely recognised through- complement the learning of the four major swimming strokes. A mix-
out society. Most parents and schools consider swimming to be an and-match approach may lead to omitting some key skills, which may
essential life skill. However, the teaching of swimming is often viewed have a direct effect on skills developed later in the programme.
as a complicated process, and many schoolteachers question their
Note that each developmental unit does not correspond to one lesson.
ability to deliver an effective swimming programme. Complete Guide
You can develop specific lesson plans only after considering the needs
to Primary Swimming aims to demystify this process and to provide a
of the learners and the teaching environment. It is likely that each unit
clearly defined series of steps that, if followed, will enable teachers to
will cover a number of lessons; the exact number will vary according
teach effectively and learners to develop a range of skills in a safe and
to many factors, such as the ability of the learners, the length of the
fun environment. Underpinning this goal is a belief that schoolteachers
sessions and the effectiveness of the teaching. However, it is not always
already have a range of skills and an expertise that can be transferred
necessary to start at unit 2, particularly if swimmers have had some
to the pool environment with great success.
previous experience. Use your own professional judgement along with
the checklist that appears at the end of each unit. For example, if the
Developmental Units swimmers are considered good enough to start at unit 4, use the unit
3 checklist to ensure that they can complete the full range of skills
Designed as a practical guide, this book is made up of developmental required by that point. If they cannot complete the required skills, spend
units. Unit 1 deals with planning. It provides clear guidance on important time revising and ensuring that all the skills have been learned before
considerations before a swimming programme is introduced, which is moving to unit 4.
vii

--- Page 10 Text ---
How to Use This Book
appendix a. Describing what they have done
b. Observing, describing and copying what others have done
The appendix provides sources of additional information for further
c. Using what they have learnt to improve the quality and control
guidance and support, including the following:
of their work
• Pupil-to-teacher ratios 4. Knowledge and understanding of fitness and health
• Incentive awards a. Recognising the importance of being active
• Equipment and teaching aids b. Recognising and describing how their bodies feel during dif-
• Useful contacts ferent activities
Key Stage 2
Links to the national Curriculum
1. Acquiring and developing skills
Throughout each unit, links are made to the National Curriculum for a. Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones
Physical Education (NCPE) for England, key stages (KS) 1 and 2. (The
b. Performing actions and skills with more consistent control
NCPE Handbook is available to purchase from the Department for Educa-
and quality
tion, Publications Department, Castle View House, East Lane, Runcorn,
2. Selecting and applying skills, tactics and compositional ideas
Cheshire WA7 2GJ, or it can be downloaded from www.education.gov.
uk.) Although the NCPE is the main focus for these links, additional links a. Planning, using and adapting strategies, tactics and composi-
to personal, social and health education (PSHE) are made. Teachers tional ideas for individual, pair, small-group and small-team
should also look for links that can be made with other curriculum areas. activities
The NCPE identifies four aspects of teaching and learning that are b. Developing and using their knowledge of the principles behind
necessary during each key stage of learning: the strategies, tactics and ideas to improve their effectiveness
Key Stage 1 c. Applying rules and conventions for different activities
3. Evaluating and improving performance
1. Acquiring and developing skills
a. Identifying what makes a performance effective
a. Exploring basic skills, actions and ideas with increasing
b. Suggesting improvements based on this information
understanding
4. Knowledge and understanding of fitness and health
b. Remembering and repeating simple skills and actions with
increasing control and coordination a. Knowing how exercise affects the body in the short term
2. Selecting and applying skills, tactics and compositional ideas b. Warming up and preparing appropriately for different activi-
ties
a. Exploring how to choose and apply skills and actions in
sequence and in combination c. Knowing why physical activity is good for their health and
well-being
b. Varying the way they perform skills by using simple tactics
and movement phrases d. Knowing why wearing appropriate clothing and being hygienic
is good for their health and safety
c. Applying rules and conventions for different activities
Reprinted from Department of Education, 2011, National curriculum for physical education (Ottawa,
3. Evaluating and improving performance
Canada: Crown Copyright).
viii

--- Page 11 Text ---
How to Use This Book
Programme of Study The National Curriculum (NC) is a minimum entitlement, but this
book aims to take swimmers beyond the minimum to ensure that they
Within the context of swimming activities and water safety, the pro- are able to complete the four recognised strokes and a range of skills
gramme of study can be delivered at KS1 (normally 5–7 years) and/or with confidence whilst also being comfortable in and around water.
KS2 (8–11 years). However, a best practice would be to have a swimming The NC is developed by and is the responsibility of the Department
programme that covers both key stages. for Education. The information provided in the previous text is taken
The programme of study for swimming activities and water safety as from the revised NC dated September 2000.
described in the NCPE is as follows:
national Curriculum review
1. At KS1, swimmers should be taught to
a. move in water; for example, jump, walk, hop and spin, using At the time of this writing, the Department for Education has embarked
swimming aids and support. upon a review of the NC, and changes are anticipated for September
b. float and move with and without swimming aids. 2014. A revised curriculum will not affect the relevance and validity
of the progressions and activities contained within Complete Guide to
c. feel the buoyancy and support of water and swimming aids.
Primary Swimming, although specific links between the activities and
d. propel themselves in water using different swimming aids,
the requirements of the NCPE may need to be reviewed.
arm and leg actions and basic strokes.
2. At KS2, swimmers should be taught to
time to get going
a. pace themselves in floating and swimming challenges related
to speed, distance and personal survival.
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming is a practical book that you should
b. swim unaided for a sustained period of time over a distance take to and use on the poolside. Time for the planning of swimming les-
of at least 25 metres. sons can be limited; therefore you can use this publication as a constant
c. use recognised arm and leg actions whilst lying on the front source of reference.
and the back. The ability to swim is a gift that all children should be given; this life
skill will open up endless opportunities to enhance each child’s quality
d. use a range of recognised strokes and personal survival skills
of life. This guide will assist all those involved in the teaching of swim-
such as front crawl, backstroke, breaststroke, sculling, float-
ming to provide a safe and stimulating programme that will provide
ing and surface diving.
the platform for ongoing future development.
Reprinted from Department of Education, 2011, National curriculum for physical education (Ottawa,
Canada: Crown Copyright).
ix

--- Page 12 Text ---
This page intentionally left blank.

--- Page 13 Text ---
Unit
1
Planning
OUtCOme
At the end of this unit, you should be able to meet the following outcome:
1.1: Develop a whole-school approach to teaching swimming.
1

--- Page 14 Text ---
E
ffective planning contributes significantly to the quality of your programme may best be delivered. Some schools are in the fortunate
programme. Whilst classroom teachers are familiar with the key position where children may swim every year throughout the primary
aspects of planning, swimming presents its own unique challenges. For school, but others have to be more selective because they must effectively
example, swimming often takes place off site in a facility that is owned use a finite amount of time across all curriculum areas.
or managed by a third party. In such cases, close collaboration with the In general terms, the nature, content, and duration of a school swim-
management is essential to ensure that appropriate provisions are made ming programme is influenced by a number of factors, including access
and that any potentially conflicting demands, such as shared school and to a pool, travel distance and travel time, priority placed on swimming
community use, can be effectively managed. Even when a school has a in the school, expertise and commitment of the teaching staff and size
swimming pool on site or is able to access a pool in another school, you of the budget allocated to swimming. A school with a pool on site is
must consider many factors unique to swimming. They are identified likely to have more opportunities to develop a comprehensive swimming
in the next section. programme than one that has a considerable distance to travel, although
Schools, communities and local facilities share many common good organisation and good links to other facilities and swimming
aspects, and they also have their own particular requirements. There- providers can often make up for difficulties in accessing and travelling
fore, it is not possible to identify all aspects that should be considered to a swimming facility. When planning a school programme, you must
in the planning stage. The considerations discussed in the next section also look beyond the school day and explore opportunities that may be
provide you with a basis for whole-school planning and help to ensure available for all learners to continue aquatic activity as part of a local
that the swimming programme can be delivered in a safe and effective community programme. This will help to enhance the swimming provi-
learning environment. sion available to them.
Developing a whole-School approach Organisation and Delivery
In this context, a whole-school approach refers to the way in which Swimming teachers have discussed the ideal age to introduce young
the whole school have involvement in the planning of the swimming people to a swimming programme at great length without reaching any
programme to ensure that learning opportunities are maximised not consensus. A persuasive argument exists for beginning as early as pos-
only within the context of swimming but also in relation to the wider sible as a means of reducing the fear factor, but an alternative argument
curriculum. In addition, a whole-school approach should develop a clear states that beginning a programme when children already have better
understanding of the intended outcomes of the swimming programme developed coordination and a degree of independence has benefits. The
and the steps required to achieve the outcomes. characteristics of the local community make a difference, too. If the
The National Curriculum (NC) is in a period of potential change. culture is one where swimming is an integral part of family activity, the
However, it is currently nonprescriptive in terms of which year groups need to take young people from a very early age may not be so great.
should attend swimming, and it states merely that a swimming pro- However, if swimming is not an integral part of the culture of the local
gramme should exist at key stages 1 and/or 2. Whilst it is difficult to community, taking children from an earlier age may have benefits. In
speculate on any changes that may be made in the future, this aspect addition, the facility may be a factor to consider because taking very
is anticipated to remain. When considering which year groups to take small children to a swimming pool with limited shallow water is more
swimming, you should take local circumstances into account. For demanding in terms of the number of support staff required.
example, some areas may have many children whose parents have taken
them swimming from a very early age, whilst other areas may have number of Lessons
children who are about to experience swimming for the first time at
school. Both of these scenarios can have a significant influence on the What is a reasonable number of lessons to have up to the end of key
type of swimming programme offered and the age at which a swimming stage 2? No magic figure exists that indicates how many lessons a
2

--- Page 15 Text ---
Planning
non-swimmer requires to achieve the level of being safe, confident and Skills and expertise for Delivery
competent in and around water. However, it is often the case that young
Do those involved in the planning and delivery of the swimming pro-
novice swimmers will progress more quickly if the programme offered
gramme have the skills and expertise to motivate and improve the
provides regular and frequent opportunities. It is important to recognise
children’s aquatic ability, or is additional training required? Teaching
that how children learn should take priority over organisational conve-
assistants, parents and secondary students involved in courses such
nience. For example, some evidence suggests that nonswimmers improve
as Sports Leaders may have skills and expertise to complement those
more quickly when participating in intensive lessons (for example, three
available on the school staff and may have some time available to help
lessons per week over 4 or 5 weeks rather than the traditional weekly les-
your swimming programme. In addition, some of them may have spe-
sons). However, for those children who can already swim, a programme
cific swimming teaching or coaching qualifications and may be happy
spaced over a longer period of time may result in less susceptibility to
to volunteer to assist with the delivery of the school programme, both
problems of regression. It is clear that an effective swimming programme
in and out of school.
includes regular lessons delivered over a significant period of time
In addition, consider the number of staff required to ensure that the
repeated at different points throughout key stages 1 and 2. For example,
size of groups is appropriate to the developmental stage of the learn-
it is unlikely that a half-term block delivered once throughout the two
ers. Clear evidence exists (Lawton, J. 2007. Department for Education
key stages will have a significant impact on swimming abilities unless
National Top Up Scheme Review; published by ASA and Department for
it is part of a comprehensive programme linked to the extended school
Education—see the contacts list in the appendix) that small group size
day or a local community programme. A programme that is planned to
was probably the most important factor in bringing about significant
meet only the minimum statutory requirements in respect to ensuring
improvement in those previously considered to be reluctant swimmers.
that the learners have access to swimming rather than one that meets
Finally, consider the possibilities of establishing links with other learn-
their specific needs is unsatisfactory for swimmer development and
to-swim providers in the community who have trained and qualified
indefensible in terms of the effective use of school time.
swimming teachers. You might use these teachers to support the school
swimming programme delivered as part of the school curriculum or as
Duration of Lessons
part of the extended day.
Is the 30-minute lesson, often reduced to 20 to 25 minutes after chang-
Health and Safety
ing time is factored in, the most appropriate time period for effective
learning? For very young people being introduced to swimming and who
may find the water and pool environment cold, 20 to 25 minutes may Schools and other organisations that teach swimming have a duty to
be ideal. However, for older learners who may be competent swimmers, consider the health and safety of children. One element of this duty of
20 to 25 minutes may not provide the opportunity for a programme care is to minimise risk to learners and teachers. Teachers are constantly
managing risk in the classroom and the playground; the swimming pool
that is challenging and meets their particular needs. Subject to the
is no different. In simple terms, to minimise risk you are required to
logistics, a school may have different time allocations based on age
do the following:
and ability. For example, it may be that children in years 1 to 3 attend
swimming on a weekly basis for periods of around 30 minutes whilst
• Identify possible areas of risk.
those in years 4 to 6 attend every second week but for 45 to 60 minutes.
• Take steps to reduce the level of risk.
An additional consideration is travelling time. Depending on where
the pool is, a 25-minute lesson could take upwards of 1 1/2 hours. In Every swimming pool is required to have pool safety operating proce-
such circumstances, consider whether it would be a better use of time dures (PSOPs) in place that are reviewed on a regular basis. This normally
to have a much longer lesson, perhaps delivered every 2 weeks rather consists of the normal operating procedure (NOP) and the emergency
than every week. action plan (EAP) for the pool, changing facilities and associated plant
3

--- Page 16 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
and equipment. The NOP should set out the way a pool operates on a dance to cover for emergencies. Many teachers prefer this arrangement
daily basis. It should include details of the layout, equipment, manner of because it allows them to focus on the teaching without this additional
use, user group characteristics and any hazards or activity-related risks. responsibility. However, some pools require all those working on the
The EAP should give specific instructions on the action to be taken in poolside to have also undertaken some form of safety training in order
the event of an emergency. All staff involved in the organisation or to provide additional support to the lifeguard. It is essential that you
teaching of swimming should be familiar with the relevant sections know and implement the exact requirements related to lifeguarding at
of the PSOPs and they should practise the EAP on a regular basis and the facility. Irrespective of the requirements that are in place related to
record details. safe supervision, best practice would dictate that all those working on
If you deliver a swimming programme at a local leisure centre or the poolside have some basic training in safety. Prompt and appropri-
similar, you can be almost guaranteed that the PSOP will be in place, ate intervention can often prevent a minor safety issue from developing
although it is appropriate to ask for a copy. Certain aspects will be of into something much more serious. If required, most facility providers
little interest (for example, the operation of the plant) whereas other will be delighted to organise and deliver appropriate safety training to
aspects, such as the evacuation procedures, will be relevant. You should help ensure that the swimming programme is delivered in the safest
identify those aspects that affect you most and ensure that all those possible environment.
involved in the delivery of the programme have all the information
that they need. In addition, you should practise some aspects, such Pool Design
as the pool evacuation procedures, to ensure that all staff and learn-
ers are aware of what to do in an emergency. When you rehearse the Consider the suitability of the general design of the pool area for teach-
evacuation procedures, you should document this to provide evidence ing. Some leisure-type pools (not normally found on school sites but
should it be needed. could be in a joint use facility), particularly those with features such as
Other safety-related factors to consider include lifeguards, pool flumes, fountains and wave machines, are not ideal for teaching swim-
design, water depth, water quality, pool organisation, staffing and ming and, where they are used, may require additional supervision.
pupil-to-teacher ratios.
water Depth
Lifeguards
Consider the importance of water depth in relation to the ability and
A lifeguard must be available whenever a school swimming lesson is height of the learners. Pools with a large expanse of shallow water have
taking place. Ideally the lifeguard is a designated person with an appro- considerable benefits in terms of teaching novice swimmers. Where
priate nationally recognised lifeguard qualification. The publication limited shallow water exists, you’ll need to consider how to designate
Managing Health and Safety in Swimming Pools (Health and Safety shallow and deep water and take steps to ensure that nonswimmers
Executive 2003; available in PDF format at www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/ cannot inadvertently drift into deep water.
hsg179.htm) states that in certain circumstances, a swimming teacher
may fulfil a dual role of swimming teacher and lifeguard, but this role water Quality
is subject to being trained to carry out a rescue and provide basic life
support. This only applies to programmed swimming, which is defined Consider the effects of temperature and water clarity. When teaching
as having a formal structure, disciplined, supervised and continuously young people to swim, it is important to provide an inviting pool envi-
monitored from the poolside. ronment and warm water. Aim for a water temperature in the region
Generally, although not always, if the swimming programme is deliv- of 28 degrees Celsius. A well-maintained pool will have clear, sparkling
ered in a local authority pool or a similar facility, it is a requirement of water where, even in the deepest parts of the pool, the floor is clearly
hire to have one or more qualified lifeguards from the facility in atten- visible. However, from time to time, the water may become cloudy. If
4

--- Page 17 Text ---
Planning
this occurs to such an extent that you cannot see the pool floor, you ciation (ASA), which is the governing body for swimming throughout
should postpone lessons until the matter is rectified. England. Such guidelines are usually based on the number of learners
considered reasonable for a teacher to manage safely. When determining
Pool Organisation the number of learners allocated to each member of staff, you should
consider factors such as age, ability, size in relation to the pool depth,
In many instances, schools have exclusive use of the swimming pool the expertise and experience of the teacher, the environment in which
when delivering lessons. However, this is not always the case, particularly the teaching will take place and whether there are any specific learning
where a local authority pool is used. In these instances, the areas to be or behavioural difficulties.
used by the school and the public must be clearly designated through Whilst these guidelines are useful when planning and organising the
the use of pool dividers such as lane ropes or portable booms. When teaching of swimming, they cannot take into account the particular
working in a shared use situation, some schools have found it helpful to circumstances in which the teacher operates, and actual numbers need
require swimmers to wear particular coloured swimming caps to ensure to be based on local conditions. Examples of circumstances that might
that they can be quickly and easily identified. In shared use pools, it is dictate that the ratios be lower than those stated include the following:
also essential to clarify with the management of the facility the exact
• A wide variation in swimming ability
provision for lifeguard cover and who is responsible for what.
• Language, learning, physical or behavioural difficulties
Staffing
As with all curriculum areas, having a skilled and knowledgeable work-
While guidelines exist for pupil-to-teacher ratios, the actual numbers need to fit local
force is essential in terms of the quality of the programme delivered,
conditions.
and it is the head teacher’s responsibility to ensure that teachers are
competent to carry out their roles safely and effectively. In cases where a
combination of external swimming teachers and classroom teachers give
lessons, it is important to allocate time to ensure that both parties can
contribute to all aspects related to planning and delivery. Combining the
skills and knowledge of the schoolteacher with the specialist knowledge
of a fully qualified swimming teacher provides the best basis for a suc-
cessful programme. In some instances, the time given for schoolteachers
and swimming teachers to meet is restricted to the 5 or 10 minutes before
or after a lesson; this is clearly insufficient. For a successful programme,
you must allocate appropriate time to ensure that all aspects of planning
and delivery can be fully addressed. See Duty of Care and Working With
the Swimming Teacher for additional guidance on working with your
swimming teacher.
Pupil-to-teacher ratios
Guidelines related to the recommended number of learners for each
teacher are often provided by the Local Education Authority (LEA)
and by national organisations such as the Amateur Swimming Asso-
5

--- Page 18 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
• A large water area either to work largely independently or to work alongside the classroom
• Deep water areas into which swimmers with poor ability could teacher. In this situation, however, you should maximise the expertise and
stray experience of the qualified swimming teacher, and regular planning meet-
ings will help to ensure that the most appropriate programme is delivered
• Glare or reflection causing lack of visibility beneath the water
to the learners. The qualified swimming teacher may have considerable
surface
experience and expertise in the teaching of swimming but have limited
• Availability of assistance in the water knowledge and understanding of the requirements of the NC.
It is common practice for schools using a local authority pool to buy
For specific details on pupil-to-teacher ratios, see the appendix.
in the services of one or more swimming teachers provided by the pool.
Note that the NC requires all schoolchildren to learn about health and
Even in this case, the school must ensure that each swimming teacher
safety and identifying risks and hazards. Helping learners to identify
is appropriately qualified and is also Criminal Record Bureau (CRB)
and control risk is an important aspect of this requirement.
checked at the enhanced disclosure level. In most instances where an
external swimming teacher is used, a level 2 certificate is the minimum
who Can teach Swimming? teaching qualification required for assuming responsibility for a group
of swimmers. Swimming teachers with a level 1 certificate are only
In schools with a pool on site, it is likely that most if not all of the qualified to work under the supervision of a level 2 (or above) teacher.
classroom teachers and many classroom assistants will be involved
in the delivery of the swimming programme. Many teaching skills are working with the Swimming teacher
generic; strategies used in the classroom for areas such as managing
behaviour, differentiating tasks, working with different ability groups In many respects, your external swimming teacher will be your most
and planning a learning programme can be transferred to the pool valuable resource, and therefore it is important that the resource is used
environment with great effect. Other aspects, such as the organisation to the maximum benefit of the learners and the school. The most effective
of a swimming lesson or positioning for effective communication, have model for the delivery of swimming in schools is for a qualified swim-
some pool-specific applications. However, in many instances the missing ming teacher to work alongside a qualified schoolteacher or qualified
ingredient is often not how to teach but what to teach. teaching assistant who has also undertaken some training in teaching
The issue of who can teach swimming is related to competence and swimming. This model combines the swimming-specific technical skills
may be defined as ‘having the skills, knowledge, understanding and and knowledge of the swimming teacher with the generic teaching skills
expertise necessary to plan, deliver and evaluate the programme’ (Whit- and knowledge of the schoolteacher or teaching assistant in a way that
lam, J. 2012. Safe Practice in Physical Education and Sport. Association can enhance the teaching and learning process. In addition, a school-
for Physical Education). Teachers have a responsibility to be able to teacher knows most learners by name, has a more detailed knowledge
teach swimming in a safe environment with a sound understanding of of the learners in general, knows learners’ particular needs and is fully
the needs and stages of development of all the learners in their care. aware of the expectations in terms of behaviour. Those schools that take
Therefore, some teachers may have to engage in swimming-specific learners swimming, hand them over to the qualified swimming teach-
professional development. ers and sit back and just observe should consider carefully whether the
expertise and experience available is being used to the best effect. The
Duty of Care development of an effective schoolteacher–swimming teacher relation-
ship does not occur by chance; time is required to establish and nurture
Teachers have overall responsibility for learners regardless of who may be the relationship to achieve maximum benefits.
actually engaged in teaching them. This responsibility includes lesson con- Whilst the schoolteacher has overall responsibility for the teaching
tent. It equally applies if a school employs an external swimming teacher and learning and for the programme to be followed, it is clearly sensible
6

--- Page 19 Text ---
Planning
to utilise the technical expertise of the swimming teacher to help guide gramme. Some volunteers may have transferable skills, knowledge
this process. To ensure that the skills, knowledge and expertise of both and expertise from other areas or may have experience assisting with
parties are used to their best effect, you must allocate some time to swimming outside of the school environment. Alternatively, the school
planning that is over and above a brief exchange of words at the begin- may encourage volunteers to engage in swimming-specific professional
ning or end of a swimming lesson. All those involved in the delivery of development opportunities or provide on-the-job training.
the programme need to be clear about their responsibilities, who they
will be teaching and their stage of development, the content that will
teaching From the Poolside
be taught, how it will be delivered and the expected outcomes of the
group that they are teaching. or in the water
If you are a schoolteacher who is new to teaching swimming, it may
be helpful to initially work in a supporting role alongside a more expe- In most circumstances the recommended teaching position is from
rienced teacher who can serve as a mentor whilst you gain confidence the side of the pool, because it provides the best position to oversee the
in the how and what. As your confidence grows, you can gradually whole group in terms of safety and to provide appropriate feedback on
increase your responsibilities in planning and delivery. the performance of each learner in the group.
However, opinions vary with regard to the teaching of nonswimmers
additional adult Support and in certain circumstances, subject to carrying out a risk assess-
ment, learning might be enhanced through the provision of support
The section titled Organisation and Delivery referred to the use of exter-
nal adult support such as parents. Many schools have a strong tradition
in encouraging this type of external help and support, largely through Teaching in the water can be helpful for providing additional support.
the use of unqualified volunteers. Support of this nature is often used
in two ways: to act as an observer and provide an additional pair of
eyes or to assist with the teaching process. Regardless of the role you
plan for the additional support to play, you should ensure the following:
• They fully understand the role that you wish them to carry out;
it is usually in a supporting capacity.
• They have the skills and knowledge required to carry out the role,
and appropriate training has been provided if it is necessary.
• You have discussed expectations in areas such as content, behav-
iour and discipline.
• The supervising teacher has the skills and knowledge to effectively
manage and direct additional adult support.
• If support materials are required, these have been provided in
advance of the lesson to guide the adult support in the areas to
be covered.
Whilst many volunteers will not have recognised swimming-related
qualifications, they can still bring value to the school swimming pro-
7

--- Page 20 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
in the water. When working with children who have severe or multiple Pairs
physical disabilities, in-water support is essential. However, in a more
In this strategy, a group works in pairs; one swimmer completes the
mainstream setting, you need to make the decision based on the envi-
task, then the partner follows. For example, swimmer 1 swims one
ronment and circumstances where the teaching is taking place. If you
width, then on the teacher’s instruction, swimmer 2 does the same.
decide to provide in-water support, it should be considered additional
This strategy can be effective for a large group because it halves the
support and should not replace having a teacher on the poolside. The
number of swimmers that the teacher is required to observe. (The level
only exception to this rule would be when working on a one-to-one or
of effectiveness is in terms of teaching, not safety.) This method also
one-to-two basis.
ensures that swimmers receive a rest (also important for skill develop-
ment) but does not address the issue of some receiving too much rest
working effectively with a group
and others too little rest. In addition, the focus of the teacher can be on
starting and stopping swimmers rather than on their performance and
All swimming lessons should aim to develop knowledge, skills and
the identification of areas for improvement.
understanding whilst also being sufficiently active to contribute towards
the overall fitness levels of the learners. In addition, improvements in
Pairs with repetitions
skills are brought about by a number of factors to which the opportunity
to practise is central. Lessons in which learners in a group are asked In this strategy, the group works in pairs, but this time the teacher
to perform predominantly one at a time can deprive learners of the specifies the number of widths and repetitions. For example, swimmer
opportunity to practise and as a result can have an adverse effect on 1 completes two widths, followed by swimmer 2; this is repeated three
skill development and fitness. Therefore, the way in which a group is times. Depending on the ability of the pairs, the teacher may vary the
organised can contribute significantly towards activity levels. You can number of repetitions so that some pairs complete three repetitions
adopt a number of strategies to make the best use of the time and space whilst other pairs might complete only two. This method helps to
available. Examples of appropriate strategies follow. overcome the problem of some swimmers having too much rest whilst
others receive too little. A slight variation on this is where the number
random Spacing of repetitions is not specified and pairs are asked to continue until asked
to stop. This allows for even greater differentiation whilst also keeping
This strategy is often used for beginners in shallow water where learn- learners active, and it allows the teacher the freedom to move around
ers are working largely independently on tasks or activities set by the the group and provide feedback on an individual basis as required.
teacher. The overall structure is informal, and learners make the best
use of the space available. two Subgroups
One group In this strategy, the group is divided into two subgroups; each group
works independently. Whilst this is initially quite demanding for the
This strategy is often used when the group is small and working on the teacher, once the method is established it is very effective in terms of
same activity or task. All learners are required to complete a set distance allowing the teacher to differentiate, taking into consideration the needs
and then stop before being given additional instructions. This strategy of each of the subgroups. In some instances this strategy may incorpo-
can often work if the group is small, but with a large group it is difficult rate a group working from a prepared schedule that is positioned on
for the teacher to observe all learners. In addition, those who complete the poolside for swimmers to view.
the task first often have too much rest, and those who take longer to Note that within any group structure, further differentiation may be
complete the task tend to have insufficient rest. required to fully meet the needs of all learners.
8

--- Page 21 Text ---
Planning
evaluating your Programme and Planning may be prepared to assist with curriculum activities, which provides
the opportunity to build positive relationships and helps to break down
for the Future social barriers sometimes associated with club activity. However, you
should ensure that any external organisation invited into schools to assist
As in all curriculum areas, knowledge of where you are and where you with curriculum or out-of-school activities goes through the appropriate
want to be is the first stage in working out how you intend to bridge vetting procedures and that a close liaison exists between the school
the gap between them. In terms of swimming, a number of tools are and the external organisation in respect of the activities taught and the
available to assist in monitoring performance and recognising achieve- style of the delivery. In addition, schools that help to direct children to
ment, including the checklists provided at the end of each of the units community clubs must ensure that the clubs are child friendly and have
in this book. In addition, many local authorities have award schemes the appropriate level of expertise to deal sensitively with young people;
specifically designed for school swimming, and national organisations they should offer programmes appropriate to their age, maturation
such as the ASA and the Swimming Teachers’ Association (STA) have and ability. For many sports, club accreditation processes are in place.
comprehensive award schemes that can be used to monitor progress and Schools have a responsibility to ascertain this information and, where
recognise achievements. The appendix contains additional information possible, to direct pupils to clubs that have met the standards required.
about incentive award schemes. In respect of swimming, the ASA swim21 accreditation will identify
How schools monitor and record learners’ progress in the area of clubs that have shown that they have structures and personnel in place
swimming is a matter for internal discussion and consideration. How- to provide programmes appropriate to young people in a supportive
and friendly environment.
ever, this cannot be left to chance; having a clear understanding of learn-
ers’ achievements will provide the basis for planning for the future. As
a minimum, all schools should be clear in terms of how many children where to Start: a Few guiding thoughts
can and cannot swim, how many can meet the minimum requirement of
completing 25 metres without undue stress, which children may be cat- As you begin your swimming programme, it is useful to establish a few
egorised as lacking water confidence or having a pool phobia and which principles that help you to formulate your ideas on how to approach
children may be categorised as moving towards gifted and talented. the task in hand. The thoughts detailed in this section were developed
as a result of many years of experience of teaching swimming to a wide
variety of participants. Use them as a starting point to help develop your
Looking Beyond the School Day
own personal guiding principles. As you gain experience and your teach-
ing approach evolves, you can adjust your principles to evolve with you.
When planning a school programme, look beyond the school day and
explore opportunities that may be available to enhance and extend the Doing the ground work
school swimming programme. Engaging young people in activity in
and beyond the school day is an important aspect of government poli- Many teachers of swimming attempt to teach people to swim before they
cies to encourage healthy lifestyle and reduce obesity. School provides are ready. Often learners are pressured to quickly perform something
a wonderful opportunity to influence the participation habits of all that resembles the recognised strokes. Pressure can come from many
young people. places, such as from parents or from the limited time available. Every-
For many people, barriers to joining a swim club or exercise club exist, body involved in the teaching of swimming has a similar aspiration,
but you can take steps to break down those barriers. For example, many but the route taken to achieve it can vary considerably. Introducing the
clubs are delighted to be invited into schools to talk to children and even formal teaching of strokes too early often has the effect of developing
to offer taster sessions. Some clubs have qualified coaches available who aspects of technique that prevent the learner from swimming effectively
9

--- Page 22 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
and efficiently. Just think about how many times you observe people a multistroke approach, where the learner is introduced to a wide vari-
swimming front crawl with the head out of the water, often moving ety of movements of the arms and the legs with the aim of discovering
from side to side as they try desperately to take in oxygen that the body which suits the individual. Then these movements are transferred to
needs. This occurs as a direct result of the swimmer not having fully the most appropriate strokes. Whilst this approach can be effective, it
developed some key underpinning skills. fails to take full account of the positive transfer of skill from one move-
ment to another. For example, much transfer of skill exists between
Floating is the Key backstroke and front crawl, but little exists between either of these
strokes to breaststroke. In addition, breaststroke is the most technically
The very essence of swimming is to float and then to move the arms complex of all of the strokes, requiring a level of coordination that is
and the legs. Once a learner can float on the back and the front (with not required for front crawl or backstroke. Butterfly is technically less
face in the water) without support, the ability to move through the complex than breaststroke, but it requires a high degree of coordination
water is relatively simple. Different strokes require different movement and water confidence to be performed effectively.
patterns, but they will be easy to develop once floating has been
achieved. Swimming aids
Being at ease in the water Swimming aids are often used as a comfort blanket for the teacher
rather than an aid for the learner. A wide range of swimming aids are
Being at ease in the water is a necessary prerequisite to teaching people available, and they can make significant contributions to a swimming
to swim. The 10-unit programme outlined in this book has at its heart programme at all stages. Aids such as brightly coloured fish, sinkers,
the development of confidence in, on and under the water. Only when hoops and balls can help to motivate learners and make lessons fun.
learners have developed the feeling of being at home in the water will However, difficulties can occur when flotation aids are used, including
they move to the development of effective swimming strokes. traditional floats, arm bands, and woggles (long, cylindrical floats that
are sometimes referred to as noodles). Sometimes, the facility dictates
Swimming on the Back that these aids be used in the early stages. For example, if the learners
cannot stand up in the pool and no in-the-water support staff are avail-
Most learners swim more easily on their backs than on their fronts. For able, armbands may be a necessity for safety reasons whilst learners
a variety of reasons, some learners require longer to learn the swimming develop independence. However, this aid is quite different from being
strokes than others. One frequently observed difficulty relates to putting an aid to learning to swim. In those circumstances where a shallow
the face in the water and being able to breathe. The 10-unit programme water teaching pool or a well-marked shallow section of a main pool is
aims to overcome this difficulty, but it takes longer with some learners available, this type of aid may not be required.
than with others. Swimming on the back has the advantage of allowing For example, armbands can result in the learner being vertical in the
the face to be clear of the water, so breathing can occur almost naturally. water, but each of the four recognised strokes requires the learner to
Once a learner can float on the back, it is a very short step to developing be horizontal or close to horizontal. Traditional rectangular floats are
early movement through the water and a simple progression to swim- often used to help the learner travel across the pool whilst kicking the
ming backstroke. legs up and down and with the head out of the water. However, front
crawl, which this activity is trying to develop, requires the face to be in
transfer of Skill the water, and as a result the learner’s activity will reinforce one of the
key actions you are trying to avoid. Front crawl kicking with a float is
Backstroke and front crawl should be taught before breaststroke and probably better suited to those who are already competent swimmers
butterfly. This is often an area of great debate. Many teachers advocate but who need to strengthen the leg action.
10

--- Page 23 Text ---
Planning
Key Skills • Process for identifying medical issues
• Dealing with teacher absence
The ability to swim is based on a number of key skills. These skills
• Supervision of changing areas
include the following:
Teaching Methodology (see also Where to Start)
• Buoyancy and the ability to float
• The framework in which each teacher operates
• Balance and the ability to move the body into various positions
• Teaching from the poolside or in the water
• Submersion and breath control
• Including those with additional needs
• Relaxation and a feeling of being at home in the water
• Use of manual support in the water
• Use of armbands and other flotation devices
Developing your whole-School
• Use of incentive schemes
Swimming guidance Document
• Process for monitoring and reviewing teaching methodology
Having considered the issues raised in this unit along with other issues Programme Delivery
that may be specific to your school and community, aim to develop a • How the pool will be organised and how the learners will be
guidance document that sets out the way in which swimming should grouped
be delivered as part of your school curriculum. This document need not
• How groups will be managed to ensure opportunities to practise
be lengthy, but it should provide the basis on which the programme
are maximised
should be organised and delivered. Aspects to consider include the
• Who can work most effectively with the different-ability groups
following:
(For example, the qualified swimming teacher might work with the
Programme Overview more able swimmers or with nonswimmers or reluctant swimmers.)
• Overall aim of the programme • How to use games and fun activities
• How much time can realistically be allocated to achieve the aim • How to manage and utilise teaching assistants and other helpers
• In which years swimming will be offered • How to deal with reluctant swimmers
• How success will be measured • How to record progress and achievement
• How the programme will link with other aquatic opportunities
When completing your Whole-School Swimming Guidance docu-
that may be available in the local community
ment, you may also wish to consider some of the issues raised in unit
Health and Safety 2 of this book. The first step in developing your document is to focus
• Managing travel to and from the pool (if appropriate) on the planning considerations rather than the swimming-specific con-
tent of your programme. However, once the planning process has been
• Requirements for lifeguarding
completed you will need to use the swimming-specific units to help
• Qualifications, experience and competence of those involved in
provide the content that will be delivered. In many ways this publica-
teaching
tion completes that part for you, but once this programme has been
• Available staffing and how it relates to the number of learners delivered you must consider whether it needs to be adapted to meet the
and the guidance on pupil-to-teacher ratios specific requirements of your learners. When finalising this section of
• Emergency procedures your document, consider the following:
11

--- Page 24 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
• Is there an overall programme to which all teachers work? • Does the programme challenge the more able as well as the less
• Is the programme appropriate for the age, previous experience able?
and ability of the class? • Does the programme include other aquatic activities such as water
• Do you have clearly identified outcomes? polo, synchronised swimming, personal survival and lifesaving?
• Does the programme focus on key underpinning skills such as • Do you have a strategy to deal with those who continue to have
flotation, submersion and aquatic breathing? difficulty in this area or continue to be reluctant swimmers?
• Does the programme develop high reliability in key underpin- • Is the programme reviewed on a regular basis, and are changes
ning skills? implemented as a result of the review?
12

--- Page 25 Text ---
Unit
2
Preparation
and Familiarisation
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
2.1: Be aware of the processes and procedures related to attend-
ing a swimming lesson and have the opportunity to clarify any
concerns.
2.2: Be introduced to the pool environment and the teaching staff.
2.3: Complete a land-based evacuation procedure.
2.4: Complete the preswimming checklist.
13

--- Page 26 Text ---
H
aving completed the planning aspects of your Whole-School Swim- Linking to the national Curriculum
ming Guidance document, you must now consider the types of
activities that you can do with the learners before taking them to the requirements
swimming pool. This is an important part of the familiarisation process.
For some young children the swimming pool can be a daunting environ- Subsequent units in this book include a direct link with the NCPE. This
ment, but some preparatory work can help to alleviate fears. This unit unit is related to the preparation for swimming, so those types of links
includes information on considerations for the school and what might are not included. However, because safety education is always a prior-
be done in that all-important first visit. ity, particularly at key stages 1 and 2, the land-based evacuation and
The steps identified in the next section may be considered exemplary; worksheet 1 are relevant in this respect.
not all schools will be able to implement all of them.
Familiarising learners with the swimming pool environment is helpful for alleviating any fears they may have.
14

--- Page 27 Text ---
Preparation and Familiarisation
OUtCOme 2.1
Be aware of the processes and procedures related to attending a swimming lesson
and have the opportunity to clarify any concerns.
Equipment and Resources
Worksheet 1: Let’s Think About Swimming
Activity Description Teaching tips
Classroom discussion or activity: 1. Approximately one week before the first swimming • Ask learners to draw a picture of people having fun in a
Getting ready for swimming lesson, discuss why being able to swim is important and swimming pool.
how it provides access to so many other water-based • Complete worksheet 1: Let’s Think About Swimming.
activities. • If possible, a staff member should complete a prelimi-
2. Discuss days and times when swimming will take place. nary visit to check out the facilities and the arrange-
3. Explain travel arrangements (if appropriate). ments for meeting and greeting the learners. An initial
4. Ask learners to identify what they will need to take discussion with the swimming teaching staff is also
when going swimming. helpful. The preliminary visit will help to inform this
5. Ask learners to identify any concerns that they may classroom activity. The visit may be combined with out-
have. come 2.2.
6. Try to identify learners who have been swimming before
and those who may be reluctant swimmers.
OUtCOme 2.2
Be introduced to the pool environment and the teaching staff.
Activity Description Teaching tips
Preswimming pool visit 1. If possible, arrange for a visit to the pool so that learners • Aim to adopt the same routine that will be applied when
can meet the teaching staff and become familiar with the the learners will actually be going swimming so that they
pool environment. will be familiar with what will happen on that day.
• Familiarise learners with the changing facilities, access to
the poolside and what to do once on the poolside.
• If possible, walk the learners around the pool showing deep
and shallow ends.
2. If a visit to the pool is not possible, consider asking the • Consider using the swimming teachers to help the learners
teaching staff to visit the school and to meet the learners. complete worksheet 1: Let’s Think About Swimming.
15

--- Page 28 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 2.3
Complete a land-based evacuation procedure.
Activity Description Teaching tips
Emergency evacuation procedure 1. Use the school hall or similar space. Aim to adopt the same procedure that will be applied
2. Designate some areas as water and other areas as the when the learners go swimming.
sides of the pool.
3. Familiarise learners with the emergency signal.
4. Explain and rehearse the emergency procedure.
To prepare learners for swimming, discuss with them why it is important and how it will enable them to partici-
pate in many water-based activities.
16

--- Page 29 Text ---
Preparation and Familiarisation
Preswimming Checklist
Things to check before going to the pool √
The pool has been booked.
Use the following checklist to ensure that the planning process has
identified all key areas for consideration. Schools and facilities vary Learners have completed worksheet 1: Let’s Think About Swimming.
considerably, so this list should not be considered as exhaustive; you Travel arrangements have been confirmed.
may need to add aspects specific to your school or the facility being
Any activities that might be used during the journey to the pool
used. Similarly, for those schools with a pool on site, some of the aspects
have been planned and are available. For example, if you are travel-
listed will not apply.
ling a long way to the swimming pool, you might efficiently use the
time to cover aspects related to water safety.
A first aid kit for travelling is available.
Staff involved in teaching are competent to carry out their roles
effectively and safely.
Sufficient staff and other adults are available to meet national or
local guidance on pupil-to-teacher ratios.
All staff are aware of which group they have been allocated and the
particular needs of the learners within the group.
Arrangements to support those with additional needs are in place.
Assistants and other helpers have been deployed appropriately.
Insurance for voluntary helpers has been checked and is in place.
Contingency plans are in place to cover the absence of a member of
staff.
Roles and responsibilities for all those involved in the swimming
lesson have been clarified.
Procedure for the supervision of changing areas is clear to staff and
learners.
Appropriate lifeguard provision will be available.
Staff have been familiarised with the emergency action plan.
Staff are familiar with any specific medical requirements of the
learners, and arrangements are in place to ensure that any required
medication will be readily available.
Arrangements for the initial assessment of learners’ abilities have
been clarified.
Resources and equipment required to support the teaching and
learning, including the availability of pool dividers to mark shallow
and deep water, will be available at the pool.
17

--- Page 30 Text ---
gnimmiwS
tuoba
kniht
s’teL
:1
teeHSKrOw
.srewsna
tcerroc
eht
elcriC
.2
tinu
htiw
noitcnujnoc
ni
detelpmoc
eb
dluohs
teehskrow
sihT
eht
fo
hcihw
ekat
dluohs
uoy
,gnimmiws
gniog
nehW
?uoy
htiw
gniwollof
emutsoc
ro
sknurt
gnimmiws
•
lewot
•
sgniht
gnimmiws
yrrac
ot
gab
•
elbbob
riah
•
stoob
llabtoof
•
?loohcs
eht
htiw
gnimmiws
og
uoy
lliw
yad
hcihw
nO
yadnoM
•
yadseuT
•
yadsendeW
•
yadsruhT
•
yadirF
•
?loop
gnimmiws
a
gniretne
erofeb
od
syawla
uoy
dluohs
tahW
.rewohs
a
ekaT
•
.teliot
eht
ot
oG
•
.pac
gnimmiws
a
no
tuP
•
.steews
dna
doof
fo
stol
taE
•
.smoor
gnignahc
eht
dnuora
esahC
•
?edisloop
eht
no
era
uoy
nehw
od
uoy
dluohs
tahW
.ylbisnes
klaW
•
.edisloop
eht
no
ylteiuq
tiS
•
.rehcaet
gnimmiws
eht
ot
netsiL
•
.edisloop
eht
gnola
nuR
•
.retaw
eht
ni
ydobemos
hsuP
•
.)sciteniK
namuH
:LI
,ngiapmahC(
gnimmiws
yramirp
ot
ediug
etelpmoC
,3102
,notwaL
.J morF

--- Page 31 Text ---
Unit
3
Starting to move
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
3.1: Know and be able to explain the safety requirements of the pool
as appropriate to the lesson.
3.2a: Be able to enter and exit the water safely; be able to move
around the pool with feet on the bottom and with confidence.
3.2b: Be able to carry out evacuation procedures safely and within
an appropriate length of time.
3.3: Be comfortable participating in various games and fun activities
related to early movement.
19

--- Page 32 Text ---
O
nce you have completed units 1 and 2, you should be ready to Linking to the national Curriculum
begin the process of introducing novice swimmers to the water
requirements
and to early movement skills. Some learners may still be apprehensive
whilst others will be raring to go. You should aim to make this initial
experience fun and enjoyable using carefully selected activities that During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
are progressive in terms of difficulty. These initial activities cannot be the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
rushed; learners will develop at their own pace. Adopting a confident, to Use This Book.
reassuring and encouraging approach helps learners to overcome any
fears and apprehensions that they may have. The teacher’s confidence
NC reference
often transfers to the learners.
Children learn through play and fun activities, particularly during PE knowledge, skills and understanding at KS1
the early stages of the learning process. Games can be used as a means
Exploring basic skills, actions and ideas with increasing 1a
of distracting concerned and worried learners by getting them to focus
understanding
on the requirements of a fun and enjoyable activity. Although specific
skills are identified and examples of fun activities are provided, you can Remembering and repeating simple skills and actions 1b
use your imagination to create your own activities. Keep in mind that with increasing control and coordination
many activities covered in other areas of physical education, as well as
Exploring how to choose and apply skills and actions in 2a
many songs and nursery rhymes, transfer well to the pool environment.
sequence and in combination
At this point you should ensure that all learners are familiar with the
evacuation procedures. If the lesson is taking place in a public pool, Varying the way they perform skills by using simple tactics 2b
you should discuss and agree on the procedures with those responsible and movement phrases
for managing the facility. If the lesson is taking place in a school pool, Describing what they have done 3a
the procedure will need to be developed, recorded and circulated to all
Observing, describing and copy what others have done 3b
those who will be involved in the swimming programme. This docu-
ment should be referred to as the Emergency Evacuation Procedures Personal, social and health education (PSHE) knowledge,
(EAP) and should be reviewed annually. Each review should be dated skills and understanding at KS1
to show that it has been looked at and changed if required. The EAP
Knowing how to make simple choices and improve their 3a
should give specific instructions on the action to be taken by staff
health and well-being
and learners in the event of an emergency, and both staff and learners
should be trained to work in accordance with the guidance provided Knowing rules for keeping safe, including basic road safety, 3g
within the EAP. and rules about people who can help them to stay safe
Listening to other people, and playing and working coop- 4b
eratively
20

--- Page 33 Text ---
Starting to Move
OUtCOme 3.1
Know and be able to explain the safety requirements of the pool as appropriate to the lesson.
Equipment and Resources
Worksheet 2: Pool Safety, for classroom activity (worksheet may require modification to meet your particular requirements)
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Safety awareness 1. Remind learners of land-based evacuation pro- • Establish behavioural expectations and pool rules. KS1 PSHE 3a/g
cedure completed as part of unit 2. Walk learners • Explain and demonstrate safety signals such as
around the pool and identify safety features and whistle and alarm.
risks. • Clarify expectations related to safety signals such as
2. Identify shallow and deep end and pool safety stop, look and listen or evacuate the pool.
markers; verbally repeat evacuation procedures; • If possible, involve pool staff in explanation of
establish meeting place for each group on pool- safety procedures.
side.
Pool safety classroom 1. Complete worksheet 2. • Classroom activity to be completed after the first KS1 PSHE 3a/g
activity 2. Repeat land-based evacuation procedure. pool-based lesson (reinforcement).
• Ask learners to explain safety requirements of the
pool and the lesson before completing worksheet
2.
• Use the school hall or similar space to simulate the
pool evacuation procedures.
21

--- Page 34 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 3.2
a. Be able to enter and exit the water safely; be able to move around the pool with feet on the bottom
and with confidence.
b. Be able to carry out evacuation procedures safely and within an appropriate length of time.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; flotation aids if required; tambour; assistant in the water if possible
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Pre-entry introduction 1. Swimmers sit on poolside with their feet in the • Observe swimmers and identify any who appear KS1 PE 1a/1b
water, then make patterns, such as small circles and timid.
large circles, with the feet. • Position timid learners closest to your main teach-
2. Kick up and down; move the legs slowly and then ing position.
faster; kick gently and then hard; make the water • If possible, have an assistant in the water.
bubble; make as much splash as possible; change
from kicking hard to kicking soft.
Entering using the ladder 1. If using a ladder entry, ask swimmers to enter the • Where possible, have assistant in the water to sup- KS1 PE 1a/1b
or steps pool facing the ladder, holding with both hands port entries.
and slowly taking one step at a time. • These methods are very controlled but time con-
2. If using step or ramp type entry, have one swimmer suming; see progressions that follow.
go at a time, holding the rail or edge of the pool
and taking one step at a time.
Initial movement 1. Swimmers move around the pool using different • Work individually and in pairs. KS1 PE 1a/1b
walking, jumping, skipping and hopping move- • Use the beat of a tambour to control movement.
ments and combinations. • Emphasise different types of movement and shapes
2. Vary height, size, direction and speed of move- to help those who may still be a little apprehensive
ments, including walking backwards and walking by giving them a specific focus.
in different geometric shapes such as circles or • See variations that follow for those who lack confi-
squares. dence.
3. Have swimmers move with the shoulders above
and then below the water.
4. Have swimmers keep the arms out to the sides to
aid balance; progress to using the hands and arms
to assist movement through the water.
22

--- Page 35 Text ---
Starting to Move
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Emergency evacuation 1. Follow procedures established in conjunction with • Have swimmers practise at an appropriate time in KS1 PSHE 3a/g
the pool staff and contained within the EAP. the lesson up to the point where they have evacu-
2. Reinforce key points and repeat if required. ated the water and are seated on the poolside.
3. Keep a record of when practised, and include in- Occasionally it may be considered helpful for the
school documentation related to swimming. learners to complete a full evacuation to include
the pool and the surrounding areas.
• Recap at appropriate intervals in the coming weeks.
Exiting using the ladder 1. For ladder type steps, ask swimmers to face the • Where possible, have assistant in the water to sup- KS1 PE 1a/1b
or steps ladder and hold with both hands, exiting one step port exits.
at a time. • These methods are very controlled but time con-
2. For a step or ramp, have one swimmer exit at a suming; see progressions that follow.
time, holding the rail or edge of the pool and
taking one step at a time.
Progression and variations
Entering using a swivel 1. Start with swimmers sitting on poolside with their • Allow all swimmers to enter the water at the same KS1 PE 1a/1b
entry feet in the water. time.
2. Position both hands on poolside to one side of the • Continue to use an alternative method such as the
body with fingers pointing away from the pool. ladder or steps for any child who is particularly ner-
3. Take the weight on the hands; rotate the body so vous.
that swimmers are facing away from the pool and
lower the body carefully into the water.
4. Check that swimmers complete entry without
scraping the chest or stomach on poolside.
(continued)
23
E5289/Lawton/3.2a1/451950/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/3.2a2/452279/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/3.2a3/452280/JRCS/R2

--- Page 36 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Initial movement for 1. Have swimmers face the side of the pool and hold • If possible, use an assistant to help. KS1 PE 1a/1b
learners who lack confi- side or rail with both hands; move along the side of • Try to maintain eye contact.
dence the pool sliding feet along pool floor; repeat lifting • Encourage and praise throughout.
one foot at a time. • Reintegrate the learners into the group as soon as
2. Have swimmers turn sideways and hold the side or possible.
rail with one hand and repeat.
3. Close to the wall, but not holding, swimmers walk
parallel to the poolside sliding the feet and then
lifting; ask swimmers to walk forwards and back-
wards.
Climbing out 1. Start with both hands on poolside. • Be aware of any child who may have a weight prob- KS1 PE 1a/1b
2. Jump from pool floor and straighten arms. lem.
3. Place knee on poolside. • Use previous methods such as ladder or steps if
4. Climb out of the water safely and with control. necessary.
E5289/Lawton/3.2b1/451951/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/3.2b2/452281/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/3.2b3/452282/JRCS/R2
24

--- Page 37 Text ---
Starting to Move
OUtCOme 3.3
Be comfortable participating in various games and fun activities related to early movement.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; flotation aids if required; tambour; assistant in the water if possible; clock or stopwatch
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Follow the leader 1. In pairs or teams, one behind the other, swimmers • Ensure a variety of movements. KS1 PE
follow the person in front and copy movements; • Use the hands to pull the body through the water. 1a/1b/3b
include movements with the arms in and out of the • Use relays and speed challenges.
water. • Ask learners about moving through water; is it
2. Experiment with different types of jumps and steps easier or harder than on land? Discuss reasons why.
such as jumping from 2 feet to 1 foot and back to
2 again, jumping from 2 feet to 2 feet and hopping
from one foot to land on the same foot.
3. Let’s go skating, sliding the feet along the bottom.
Elephants and kangaroos 1. Swimmers move in various ways to cover a set dis- Discuss which animals might cover the distance in the KS1 PE
tance. least number of steps, then the most number of steps. 1a/1b/2b
2. Ask swimmers to move like particular animals.
3. Count the number of steps taken and aim to
reduce them.
Dodgems Swimmers move freely in any direction, dodging in • Gradually reduce the space available. KS1 PE
and out of one another. • Stress the need to avoid bumping into one another. 1a/1b/2b
Coloured corners 1. The activity starts with the teacher identifying cor- • Add variation by putting swimmers into teams with KS1 PE 1a/1b
ners of the pool as a certain colour. For example, the objective that the whole team must get to the KS1 PSHE 4b
red corner, blue corner, and so on. corner.
2. Swimmers start in the centre of the shallow end of • Encourage cooperative activity to provide help
the pool moving around in a random fashion and where needed.
in time with the beat of a tambour.
3. On command, swimmers move to one of the
coloured corners designated by the teacher with
the aim of getting there as quickly as possible.
4. Once in the corner they continue to move around
until the teacher calls out a different colour and the
swimmers move accordingly.
(continued)
25

--- Page 38 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Crows and cranes 1. In shallow water two groups form lines facing each Use sounds to disguise which name is to be called KS1 PE 1a/1b
other a few feet apart. out—ccccrrrows or ccccccccranes.
2. The teacher calls out the name of one group, who
aim to get to the side of the pool behind them
before being tagged by the other group.
Tag 1. The teacher identifies two swimmers as the tag- • When moving under the outstretched arms, swim- KS1 PE 1a/1b
gers. mers’ heads should still be above water.
2. Once tagged, the learner must stand still with arms • If any swimmer submerges when going under the
out to the sides at shoulder height. outstretched arms, pause the game to show the
3. Swimmers can be released by others ducking submersion to the whole group.
under the arms.
Team tag 1. Start with two swimmers holding hands. • Stress the need for everybody to be working KS1 PE 1a/1b
2. When the pair tags a swimmer, they join onto the together and not pulling in different directions. KS1 PSHE 4b
line. Once four are joined together, they split into • Always split into pairs once four swimmers are in
two pairs; repeat until all swimmers are tagged. the line.
Nursery rhymes and 1. Use nursery rhymes to encourage up and down • Complete as group activities. KS1 PE 1a/1b
songs movement; go as far as chin to water. • If appropriate, allow learners to lead the activity.
2. Try ‘Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes’. • Having an assistant in the water can be helpful.
E5289/Lawton/3.3a/451957/JRCS/R2
3. Try Simon Says.
4. Try other rhymes to suit.
Sequence Have swimmers work in pairs to put together a short • Set the task but allow the swimmers to solve the KS1 PE
sequence of movements that show variations in problem. 1a/1b/2a
movements, height and speed. • Show completed sequences to whole group.
26

--- Page 39 Text ---
Starting to Move
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Funky travel time 1. In shallow water ask the swimmers to work out the • Ask swimmers to time themselves (or teacher KS1 PE
challenge* fastest way for each individual to travel across the times) and then repeat trying to beat the time set. 1a/1b/2b
pool using any combination of hopping, skipping, • Ask them to cover the same distance but touching
jumping etc. the bottom of the pool as few times as possible.
2. Form groups of four; working across the width • Repeat again, but try to beat the original score.
(halfway if it is a large pool), position two swimmers • Show learners good examples and ask them to
on one side and two on the opposite side. describe what they see; discuss why some teams
3. Complete a relay and ask the swimmers to work were faster than others and why some covered the
out the fastest way for the team to complete four distance with fewer touches on the pool floor.
widths (two widths if working in a large pool).
*Reprinted from Qualification and Curriculum Development Agency, The National Archives. Available: http://www.education.gov.uk/aboutdfe/armslegthbodies/a00200461/qcda
Unit 3 Checklist
√
Before moving to unit 4, the learners should be able to complete the Explain the safety requirements of the pool as appropriate to their
activities in the following checklist. Unit 4 builds on the outcomes lesson.
achieved in this unit; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve these Participate safely and effectively in an evacuation procedure.
outcomes before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the case,
Enter the water unaided, using a sitting swivel entry.
you will need to consider whether it is possible to establish a number of
groups appropriate to different stages of development. This may have Exit the water by climbing out unaided.
implications for staffing, and where it is not possible, the teacher should
Be confident moving around the pool using a range of different
aim to differentiate subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate
movements with the feet on the bottom.
to the different abilities within a single group.
Participate confidently in games and activities that require work-
ing in pairs or groups and as part of a team.
Link basic movements together into a short sequence.
27

--- Page 40 Text ---
ytefaS
looP
:2
teeHSKrOw
.srewsna
tcerroc
eht
elcriC
.3
tinu
htiw
noitcnujnoc
ni
detelpmoc
eb
dluohs
teehskrow
sihT
dluohs
uoy
,gnimmiws
rof
degnahc
evah
uoy
ecnO
retaw
eht
otni
pmuj
dna
elbissop
sa
ylkciuq
sa
loop
gnimmiws
eht
otni
hsur
•
gnitiaw
era
uoy
tslihw
dneirf
ruoy
htiw
kees
dna
edih
yalp
•
snoitcurtsni
evig
ot
rehcaet
eht
rof
ylteiuq
tiaw
•
dluohs
uoy
,edisloop
eht
no
og
nac
uoy
taht
syas
rehcaet
eht
nehW
elbissop
sa
ylkciuq
sa
edisloop
eht
otno
nur
•
gnimmiws
eb
lliw
puorg
ruoy
erehw
ecalp
eht
ot
ylteiuq
klaw
•
snoitcurtsni
rehtruf
nevig
era
uoy
litnu
ecalp
gniteem
ruoy
ta
tiaw
•
?loop
ruoy
ni
desu
langis
eht
si
tahw
,srucco
ycnegreme
na
nehW
eltsihw
eht
no
tsalb
gnol
•
elbissop
sa
duol
sa
gnituohs
rehcaet
•
mrala
na
•
rehto
•
dluohs
uoy
,mrala
ycnegreme
eht
raeh
uoy
fI
spots
mrala
eht
litnu
gnimmiws
no
yrrac
•
mrala
eht
raeh
tonnac
uoy
taht
os
retawrednu
miws
•
netsil
dna
kool
,pots
•
eht
fo
tuo
bmilc
dna
elbissop
sa
ylkciuq
sa
loop
eht
fo
edis
eht
ot
evom
,os
od
ot
dlot
nehw
•
retaw
.)sciteniK
namuH
:LI
,ngiapmahC(
gnimmiws
yramirp
ot ediug
etelpmoC
,3102
,notwaL
.J morF

--- Page 41 Text ---
Unit
4
Face in the water
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
4.1: Be comfortable putting the face in the water.
4.2a: Be introduced to the initial stage of aquatic breathing and be
comfortable with water in the mouth.
4.2b: Be introduced to the benefits of exercise.
4.3: Be introduced to aspects related to water safety away from the
pool environment.
29

--- Page 42 Text ---
H
aving completed unit 3, Starting to Move, the swimmers should
NC reference
be comfortable moving in the water and participating in games
and fun activities. Throughout unit 3, it will have become clear that PE knowledge, skills and understanding at KS1
some people are happy with their face in the water whilst others are
Exploring basic skills, actions and ideas with increasing 1a
apprehensive. Unit 4 focuses on the initial stages of developing a feeling
understanding
of being at home in the water. Being comfortable with the face in the
water is the initial part of this process, but it is often passed over too Remembering and repeating simple skills and actions 1b
quickly with the result that progress can be impaired at a later stage. with increasing control and coordination
This unit should not be confused with submersion under the water,
Exploring how to choose and apply skills and actions in 2a
which is covered in unit 5.
sequence and in combination
Varying the way they perform skills by using simple tactics 2b
Linking to the national Curriculum
and movement phrases
requirements Recognising the importance of being active 4a
Recognising and describing how their bodies feel during 4b
During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
different activities
the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
to Use This Book. PSHE knowledge, skills and understanding at KS1
Listening to other people, and playing and working coop- 4b
eratively
30

--- Page 43 Text ---
Face in the Water
OUtCOme 4.1
Be comfortable putting the face in the water.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; flotation aids if required; medium size indoor balls; sinkers; watering cans; assistant in the water if
possible
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Entries Encourage swivel entry (see unit 3 for details). • Allow all swimmers to enter the water at the same KS1 PE 1a/1b
time.
• Check that they complete entry without scraping
the chest or stomach on poolside.
• Continue to use alternative method such as the
ladder or steps for anyone who is particularly ner-
vous.
Water on the head and 1. Swimmers drip water over their ears, neck and back • Observe swimmers who appear particularly ner- KS1 PE 1a/1b
face of the head and then wash their faces; emphasise vous.
taking water to the face and then over the head. • Use an assistant in the water if available.
2. Swimmers take various body parts (e.g. chin, ear, • Encourage swimmers to try eyes closed and open.
nose) to the water; use watering cans to pour water
over the head.
3. Swimmers paint a picture on the surface of the
water using the nose.
4. Swimmers hold the rail or side of the pool and put
their faces in the water.
5. Swimmers put their hands together on the surface
of the water and take their faces to their hands;
repeat, but with hands just below the surface.
Wet and wild Swimmers scoop water in their hands and throw it in • Encourage lots of splashing of themselves and KS1 PE 1a/1b
the air. Who can make the most splashes in the water? others.
• Be cautious with those who are still timid.
(continued)
31

--- Page 44 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Pass the ball In pairs, swimmers throw a ball back and forth. Encourage them to land the ball on the water just in KS1 PE 1a/1b
front of their partner (to splash the face). KS1 PSHE 4b
Tell a story: Wakey wakey 1. You tell a story, and swimmers complete the Observe the reaction of each swimmer to the various KS1 PE 2a
actions. activities and note those who are still lacking confi-
2. Swimmers lie on poolside pretending to sleep, then dence.
they wake up for school and enter the water using
a swivel entry.
3. You tell them to have a shower and wash their
faces, then walk to school using a variety of move-
ments and with a friend play follow the leader.
4. You tell them that suddenly there is a torrential
E5289/Lawton/4.1a/451959/JRCS/R1
rainstorm (swimmers make as much splash as pos-
sible and throw water into the air).
5. You tell them to arrive at school (climb out of the
water).
Nursery rhymes and 1. Use nursery rhymes with appropriate actions Encourage face wetting rather than submersion, but KS1 PE 1a/1b
songs related to wetting the face. praise submersion if it occurs.
2. Sing ‘Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes’.
3. Play Simon Says.
4. Use other rhymes to suit.
Treasure hunt 1. Throw sinkers in the pool. Emphasise eyes open. KS1 PE 1a/1b
2. Swimmers walk around the pool with their faces in
the water and identify what the sinkers are.
32

--- Page 45 Text ---
Face in the Water
OUtCOme 4.2
a. Be introduced to the initial stage of aquatic breathing and be comfortable with water in the mouth.
b. Be introduced to the benefits of exercise.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; flotation aids if required; floating hoops; medium size indoor balls; egg flips; watering cans; assistant
in the water if possible
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Blowing bubbles 1. Swimmers hold the rail or side with both hands • Encourage swimmers to make noises like a speed- KS1 PE 1a/1b
and put their faces in the water, blowing bubbles boat.
through the mouth and then through the nose. • Who can make the most splash through blowing
2. Using egg flips, they aim to blow them across the bubbles?
pool, turning them over as many times as possible. • When using egg flips, encourage swimmers to have
the mouth close to the water to ensure that they
flip over.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/4.2a/451961/JRCS/R1
33

--- Page 46 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Racing cars 1. Swimmers move across the pool as quickly as pos- • Encourage shoulders to be low in the water and KS1 PE
sible with feet on the bottom, making a noise like a chin close to the surface. 1a/1b/4a/4b
car and pushing an object with their nose or chin. • Ask how many are now warm and why. KS1 PSHE 4b
2. Swimmers travel around objects such as floating • What do they need to do to keep warm?
hoops. • Ask them to describe how the temperature of the
3. Repeat in pairs or teams. water affects their bodies and why it is important to
warm up before exercise.
• Ask swimmers to feel their heartbeat before start-
ing the activity and immediately afterwards; discuss
why the heart is beating faster and why it is impor-
tant to exercise the heart.
• Discuss other benefits of exercise in respect of
the lungs, muscles, bones and general well-being.
Refer to current government guidance of 30 min-
utes moderate exercise 5 days a week as being
important for general health. Explain how people
can achieve this by taking a full and active part in
PE lessons and by being active during breaks such
as lunchtime; encourage walking and cycling to
school subject to safety and weather.
Simon Says Play Simon Says, incorporating the movements and • Focus on different parts of the body being KS1 PE 1a/1b
face wetting skills covered so far. immersed in the water.
• Incorporate splashing and blowing bubbles and
objects.
Spinning tops 1. In groups of three or four, swimmers pass a ball Allow the groups to work in their own time and then KS1 PE 2a/2b
around the group. as a relay race.
2. The person who receives the ball must lower him-
self or herself in the water until the chin is on the
surface, turn through 360 degrees blowing bubbles
throughout the turn and then throw the ball to
another person.
34

--- Page 47 Text ---
Face in the Water
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Water exchange 1. Swimmers hold the rail or side and bend the knees Although the thought of children taking water into KS1 PE 1a/1b
until the chin is on the surface. the mouth and releasing it may appear to be unhy-
2. Swimmers take water into the mouth, hold it in the gienic, this is what happens in swimming and the
mouth and then release it. water treatment systems are designed to cope with it.
3. Repeat several times continuously. Initially many people do not like water in the mouth
4. Incorporate water exchange with walking around as it can generate a feeling that they will choke, but
the pool allowing water into the mouth, holding it controlling water in the mouth is an important skill
in the mouth and then releasing. and a confidence builder at this stage.
‘It’s Raining, It’s Pouring’ Individually or in pairs, swimmers sing the song and Encourage learners to use as much water as possible; KS1 PE 1a/1b
pour water over themselves and then each other suggest that it is raining really hard.
using hands, watering cans or other containers.
Supporting Learners Who Lack Confidence described, but progress more slowly. Use an assistant in the water to
Less confident learners may require additional encouragement to put help if available, and gradually aim to integrate these learners into the
water on the face and the face in the water. Use the same activities just main group.
E5289/Lawton/4.2b/451962/JRCS/R2
35

--- Page 48 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 4.3
Be introduced to aspects related to water safety away from the pool environment.
Activity Description Teaching tips NC reference
Water safety awareness 1. Introduce the water safety code (WSC). • In addition to the WSC, swimmers must be aware KS1 PSHE 3a
2. The WSC explains four ways to make sure that that swimming outside in places such rivers, lakes
swimmers are safe near water: Spot the dangers, and quarries is very different from swimming in a
take safety advice, go with a friend and learn how heated swimming pool. Emphasise the following:
to help. ° Immersion in cold water that results in a drop in
3. See the next section for more details about the body core temperature can affect the heart, lungs
WSC. and brain.
° As the core body temperature drops the ability to
swim properly is reduced and can lead to the person
having difficulty moving through the water.
° Areas of outdoor water can be very deep and
problems with currents and tides can occur.
° Outdoor open water may contain unexpected
barriers such as weeds or rubbish such as old
bikes, which can be very dangerous.
• Consider asking learners to design a poster showing
the four aspects of the WSC.
• The Royal Life Saving Society produces a range of
free resources to support learning about safety in
and around the home. See www.lifesavers.org.uk.
Water Safety Code • Go with a friend is about always letting somebody know where you
• Spot the dangers is about taking extra care near water. Keep away are going and never doing activities such as swimming, fishing
from the edges of canals, quarries and riverbanks, because they or boating alone. Always go with somebody who can go and get
might crumble and may also have steep, slimy banks that can help for you even if the person cannot help you directly. Young
make climbing out difficult. Be aware that open water is often children should always go with an adult, not by themselves; an
very cold and deep and may be fast flowing. Open water may have adult can point out dangers or help if somebody gets into trouble.
hidden rubbish such as shopping trolleys or broken glass, and it • Learn how to help is about knowing what to do if somebody gets
may be polluted and may make you ill. It is difficult to estimate into trouble and how to help without endangering yourself. You
depth, and lifeguards do not work in these areas. may be able to help yourself and others if you know what to do
• Take safety advice is about swimming at a beach where there are in an emergency. For example, if you see someone in difficulty,
lifeguards on duty and always following their advice on where tell somebody, preferably a lifeguard if there is one nearby. Or, go
it is safe to swim. Look for signs or flags stating where it is safe to the nearest telephone, dial 999 and ask for the police at inland
and not safe to swim. water sites and the coastguard at the beach.
Adapted from The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents 2007.
36

--- Page 49 Text ---
Face in the Water
Unit 4 Checklist
√
Splash water onto the face.
Before moving to unit 5, learners should be able to complete the activities
in the following checklist. Unit 5 builds upon the outcomes achieved in Pour water over the head.
this unit; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve these outcomes
Put the mouth and nose in the water and blow bubbles for a mini-
before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the case, you need
mum of 5 seconds.
to consider whether it is possible to establish a number of groups appro-
priate to different stages of development. This may have implications Walk around the pool with the face in the water.
for staffing, and where it is not possible, you should aim to differentiate
Move across the pool blowing an egg flip or similar object.
subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate to the different
abilities within a single group. Take water into the mouth and release it with control.
Participate confidently in games and activities that include getting
water on the face.
Be able to describe some of the benefits of exercise.
Be able to suggest ways to ensure safety in and around water.
37

--- Page 50 Text ---
This page intentionally left blank.

--- Page 51 Text ---
Unit
5
Learning to Float
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
5.1: Be comfortable floating on the front and back, and be able to
regain the standing position.
5.2: Be able to combine floating on the front and back showing rota-
tion and balance, and be able to develop floating sequences.
39

--- Page 52 Text ---
H
aving completed unit 4, Face in the Water, learners should be com-
NC reference
fortable moving in the water, participating in games and fun activi-
ties, having their faces in the water and having water in their mouths. PE knowledge, skills and understanding
Unit 5 focuses on developing the ability to float; once mastered, floating
Exploring basic skills, actions and ideas with increasing KS1 1a
makes the transition to swimming both simple and speedy. In fact, in
understanding
many respects swimming can be described as floating combined with
movements of the arms and legs. Once they are able to float, learners Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones KS2 1a
will be well on the way to developing the swimming strokes. During
Performing actions and skills with more consistent control KS2 1b
units 1 through 4, learners have been predominantly vertical in the
and quality
water, but the swimming strokes require a horizontal body position.
Making the transition from vertical to horizontal is a significant step Planning, using and adapting strategies, tactics and com- KS2 2a
in helping the learner to swim. positional ideas for individual, pair, small-group and small-
team activities
Linking to the national Curriculum PSHE knowledge, skills and understanding
Listening to other people, and playing and working coop- KS1 4b
requirements
eratively
During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
to Use This Book.
40

--- Page 53 Text ---
Learning to Float
OUtCOme 5.1
Be comfortable floating on the front and back, and be able to regain the standing position.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; floats or woggles; assistant in the water if possible
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Moving to the horizontal 1. Holding the rail with two hands, swimmers raise one • Emphasise shoulders in the water and chin on the KS1 PE 1a/1b
on the front (at and close leg behind, then to the side; repeat with other leg water surface; aim to achieve and maintain a hori-
to the side of the pool) (see top left illustration). zontal position with little or no kicking.
2. Still holding the rail, swimmers raise both legs • Emphasise that warm muscles work better and are
behind and kick the legs up and down to achieve a less likely to suffer from pulls or strains.
horizontal position (see top right illustration); kick • Reinforce the reasons why it is important to warm
hard and then soft. up before physical activity.
3. Swimmers step away from the side, push from the • Discuss why it is important to be active for 30 min-
bottom of the pool and reach for the wall; they lift utes, 5 times a week.
one leg to the surface and then two. • Reinforce the WSC.
4. Gradually increase the distance from the side.
5. Gradually encourage face in the water when reach-
ing for the side.
E5289/Lawton/5.1b/452168/JRCS/R3-alw
E5289/Lawton/5.1a/452167/JRCS/R3-alw
(continued)
41
E5289/Lawton/5.1c1/452169/JRCS/R3-alw E5289/Lawton/5.1c2/452212/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/5.1c3/452213/JRCS/R2-alw

--- Page 54 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Moving to the horizontal 1. Introduce floats or woggles. • Less confident swimmers may do this whilst hold- KS1 PE 1a/1b
on the front (away from 2. Swimmers stand with their arms out to the side ing the side with two hands and then with one
the side of the pool) resting on the surface of the water and hold a float hand holding the side and the other hand holding
in each hand (or one woggle; if using a woggle, a float.
place it across the chest and under the armpits).
Remaining vertical, they lift one foot off the floor.
3. Repeat with other foot. • Aim for tucked sitting position.
4. Swimmers work towards being vertical but with
both feet off the floor.
5. Still with two floats (or woggle), swimmers aim to • In horizontal position on the front, encourage
raise one leg up to the side, front and back; then swimmers to have their face in the water.
both legs together to feel horizontal position on
front and back.
Floating on the front 1. Holding a float in each hand (or woggle positioned • When a floating position on the front with face in KS1 PE 1a/1b
and back with floats or under the armpits), swimmers perform a front the water has been achieved, ask swimmers to lift
woggle floating position with the face in the water. Start the head out of the water and allow the legs to sink
with face out of the water if appropriate. in order to regain the standing position (see first
2. Repeat on the back; focus also on regaining the row of illustrations).
standing position. • When a floating position on the back has been
achieved, ask the swimmers to sit up in the water
and again allow the legs to sink to the pool floor
(see second row of illustrations).
(continued)
42
E5289/Lawton/5.1d1/452283/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/5.1d2/452170/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/5.1d3/452171/JRCS/R1

--- Page 55 Text ---
Learning to Float
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Floating on the front
and back with floats or
woggle (continued)
Floating on the front and 1. Have swimmers float on the front in a star shape • Emphasise very slow and gentle movement into KS1 PE 1a/1b
back without support with the face in the water; repeat on the back. floating position.
2. Once comfortable with floating in a star shape, • Encourage swimmers to hold the breath when
experiment with different positions, like the pencil floating on the front.
float (stretched and streamlined shape with the • When floating on the back, start with shoulders in
arms and legs together), the mushroom float (curl the water; emphasise head back, eyes looking to
E5289/Lawton/5.1e1/452172/JRC
u
S/
p
R
i
2
n a tight ball wit
E
h
5 2
th
89
e
/ L
fa
a
c
w
e
to
i
n
n
/5
t
.
h
1e
e
2
w
/4
a
5
t
2
e
1
r
7
;
3
s
/
e
JR
e
CS/R2
the ceiling Ea5n2d8 9st/Loamwtaocnh/5 p.1ues3h/4e5d2 1t7o4w/JaRrCdSs/ tRh2e sur-
illustration), or floating with arms held at the sides face of the water.
of the body. • Allow very gentle up-and-down leg action if
required to maintain the horizontal position.
• For a mushroom float, look for part of the back
being out of the water.
Floating tag Swimmers play a game of tag. Once tagged, they Allow the use of floats or woggles for those who still KS1 PE 1a/1b
adopt a floating position; they can be released when need support.
others touch them.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/5.1f/453021/JRCS/R1
43

--- Page 56 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Floating time challenge Who can hold a floating position for the longest time? Use floating on the back so that swimmers are not KS2 PE 1b
encouraged to hold the breath beyond their capability.
Floating relay 1. Swimmers are grouped into teams of three or four. • Ensure that swimmers do not use a kicking action KS1 PSHE 4b
This activity is like a relay but with the objective of to assist their floating.
a team floating for the longest possible time. • Being horizontal is the objective, but allow an
2. Swimmer 1 holds a floating position. inclined position as long as the feet do not touch
3. Once his or her legs sink to the pool floor, swimmer the floor.
2 holds a floating position; continue with all swim-
mers in the group.
4. The winning team is the one that floats for the lon-
gest period of time.
OUtCOme 5.2
Be able to combine floating on the front and back showing rotation and balance,
and be able to develop floating sequences.
Equipment and Resources
Floats and woggles
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Floating/rotation combi- 1. Swimmers push from the floor or wall with the face • Stress the need to rotate using the hips and shoul- KS2 PE 1a/1b
nation in the water and the arms held by the sides of the ders, not the hands and arms.
body, and they hold the floating position. • Once the rotation is complete, ask swimmers to
2. Swimmers rotate from a front floating position to continue floating on the back by pushing the head
floating on the back; hold the floating position with back and looking at the ceiling.
arms held by the sides of the body.
44

--- Page 57 Text ---
Learning to Float
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Alphabet floats 1. Swimmers are grouped into teams of three or four. • Use aids such as floats and woggles if required. KS2 PE 2a
They are required to develop a float that involves • Allow swimmers to float on the front or back. KS1 PSHE 4b
all members of the group and shows a letter of the • Work towards controlled start and finish positions.
alphabet. • Allow swimmers time to practise and develop.
2. Repeat, but allow groups to make up a float of their • Show examples of group floats and ask learners to
own choice. identify aspects that are good; ask them to watch
and describe what they see.
Floating sequences Working individually and in pairs, swimmers develop • Use equipment such as floats and woggles as KS2 PE 2a
a sequence showing three different types of floats. required. KS1 PSHE 4b
For example, push and glide into floating on the front • Show examples of sequences developed and ask
with arms and legs stretched and together; rotate learners to identify aspects that are good; ask them
onto the back with arms held by the side; finish with a to watch and describe what they see.
star shaped float on the back.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/5.2a/452175/JRCS/R2
45

--- Page 58 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
All change* 1. Working individually, each swimmer develops a • Use equipment such as floats and woggles as KS2 PE 2a
sequence that includes two travelling movements required. KS1 PSHE 4b
and two still shapes. • Encourage swimmers to have a clear beginning and
2. Swimmers work with a partner to make a pair ending to their sequence.
sequence including two travelling movements and • Suggest that some movements or shapes may be
two still shapes. Both swimmers do the same thing on the front and others on the back.
at the same time (mirroring). Allow time for them • Emphasise good control throughout.
to develop their sequences. • Show examples of sequences developed and ask
learners to identify aspects that are good; ask them
to watch and describe what they see.
• Introduce appropriate words to describe different
shapes.
*Adapted from Qualification and Curriculum Development Agency, The National Archives.
Unit 5 Checklist
√
Before moving to unit 6, learners should be able to complete the activi- Complete a star float on the front with face in the water for a mini-
ties in the following checklist. Unit 6 builds on the outcomes achieved in mum of 3 seconds.
this unit; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve these outcomes Complete a star float on the back for a minimum of 3 seconds.
before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the case, you need
Float on the front showing two different shapes.
to consider whether it is possible to establish a number of groups appro-
priate to different stages of development. This may have implications Float on the back showing two different shapes.
for staffing. Where it is not possible, you should aim to differentiate
Combine different types of floats into a simple sequence.
subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate to the different
abilities within a single group. The floating activities listed should be Regain the standing position from a back floating position.
completed without support.
Regain the standing position from a front floating position.
Rotate from a horizontal position on the front to a horizontal posi-
tion on the back.
Explain why it is important to be active and how to achieve being
active.
46

--- Page 59 Text ---
Unit
6
Submersion and
aquatic Breathing
OUtCOme
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcome:
6.1: Be comfortable going under the water and be able to show
controlled inhalation and exhalation over a period of time.
47

--- Page 60 Text ---
A
logical progression after units 4 and 5, submersion is the final step
NC reference
in developing the feeling of being at home in the water. Sometimes
referred to as the development of watermanship, the learner should have PE knowledge, skills and understanding
overcome any fear at this point so that attention can focus on learning
Exploring basic skills, actions and ideas with increasing KS1 1a
the more specific skills related to the swimming strokes. In addition to
understanding
the skill of submersion, the learner is introduced to the basics of aquatic
breathing and the principles of inhalation and exhalation in preparation Remembering and repeating simple skills and actions KS1 1b
for integrating breathing into the swimming strokes. Often, failure to with increasing control and coordination
ensure that the learners have confidence in the skills developed during
Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones KS2 1a
units 2 through 6 results in difficulty in achieving the limb movements
Performing actions and skills with more consistent control KS2 1b
required for the recognised strokes.
and quality
Linking to the national Curriculum Knowing how exercise affects the body in the short term KS2 4a
PSHE knowledge, skills and understanding
requirements
Listening to other people, and playing and working coop- KS1 4b
During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of eratively
the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
to Use This Book.
OUtCOme 6.1
Be comfortable going under the water and be able to show controlled inhalation and exhalation over a period of time.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; egg flips; sinkers; hoops; floats or woggles; assistant in the water if possible
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Motor boats and 1. Swimmers move around the pool with chins on the Emphasise forced exhalation (explosive breathing) KS1 PE 1a/1b
submarines surface making a noise like a motorboat. when being a motor boat and very gradual exhalation
2. Swimmers move silently like submarines. (trickle breathing) when being a submarine.
Blowing egg flips 1. Swimmers move around the pool with their feet on • Emphasise explosive breathing so that the egg flip KS1 PE 1a/1b
the bottom and blow egg flips. turns over.
2. Repeat with swimmers holding two floats (or • Discuss where the mouth needs to be to ensure
woggle) and in a horizontal position kicking the that the egg flip turns over (on the surface of the
legs up and down. water).
48

--- Page 61 Text ---
Submersion and Aquatic Breathing
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Bobbing with breath 1. Holding the rail or side with both hands, swimmers • When bobbing, emphasise vertical up-and-down KS1 PE 1a/1b
holding put different parts of the head or face in the water. movement.
2. Swimmers gradually increase the amount of the • Encourage controlled movement.
face or head in the water until it becomes a bob- • As swimmers surface, discourage wiping the face to
bing action with the whole head being submerged. remove excess water.
• Ask swimmers to open their eyes after surfacing.
Bobbing with blowing Swimmers bob up and down with the whole head • Encourage controlled, slow exhalation. KS1 PE 1a/1b
bubbles submerged (as in previous activity) and blow bubbles • Look for bubbles.
under the water. • Re-emphasise the need to surface without wiping
the face and with eyes open.
Bobbing with exhalation 1. Swimmers bob up and down three times continu- • Vertical movements to be slow and controlled. KS1 PE 1a/1b
and inhalation ously; blow out underwater and breathe in when • Look for signs of exhalation in the water (bubbles).
mouth is clear. • Stress the need for movements to be continuous
2. Gradually increase depth and number until they with no pause following the inhalation.
can complete 10 bobs with control and without
stress.
Picking up objects Swimmers stand away from the side of the pool and • Focus on vertical movements and keeping the eyes KS1 PE 1a/1b
with the feet on the floor throughout. Aim to pick up open throughout.
an object from the bottom of the pool with one hand • Do not use goggles unless they are specifically
and then both hands. required for medical reasons.
Copycat 1. Arrange swimmers into pairs. Use this opportunity to identify children who are KS1 PE 1a/1b
2. In each pair, the swimmers take turns performing a having difficulties and, if possible, use an assistant to
submersion activity that their partner is required to help.
copy, such as sitting on pool floor or picking up an
object from pool floor.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/6.1a/452176/JRCS/R2
49

--- Page 62 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Funny faces In pairs, swimmers sit on the pool floor with the head Discuss how blowing out air allows the body to sink KS1 PE 1a/1b
fully submerged. They face one another and make and holding the breath helps the body to float.
funny faces.
Counting fingers In pairs, both swimmers submerge to sit on pool floor; Explain the importance of being able to open the eyes KS1 PE 1a/1b
one swimmer holds up a number of fingers and the when underwater (e.g. to see where you are going or
partner has to say how many. to find something).
Name that tune In pairs, both swimmers submerge to sit on pool floor; Use assistant in the water to help swimmers who are KS1 PE 1a/1b
one swimmer hums a tune and the other attempts to having difficulty submerging.
guess the tune.
See-saw One swimmer submerges and the other remains Encourage a continuous see-saw action without KS1 PE 1a/1b
standing; they change positions like a see-saw. pauses.
Wave Swimmers form a line. One at a time, they throw their Have swimmers keep their feet on the floor through- KS1 PE 1a/1b
arms in the air followed by submersion. out. KS1 PSHE 4b
Nursery rhymes or games Use nursery rhymes or songs such as ‘Head, Shoul- • Ask swimmers to lead the nursery rhymes. KS1 PE 1a/1b
ders, Knees and Toes’ or games such as Simon Says to • Swimmers’ faces should be in the water when
encourage submersion and other skills learned so far. touching toes.
• Simon Says—Include submersion as an activity.
• ‘Ring a Ring of Roses’—Swimmers fully submerge
on ‘all fall down’.
Treasure hunt 1. Swimmers collect objects resting on pool floor. Include relay activities where one swimmer at a time KS1 PE 1a/1b
2. Repeat in pairs or teams. collects an object and returns it to a designated place.
Over and under 1. Set up an obstacle course where swimmers are Use equipment such as sinkers or hoops to encourage KS2 PE 1a/1b
required to go over, under and around objects. variety of movements.
2. Complete as a relay type game in pairs or teams.
50
E5289/Lawton/6.1b/452178/JRCS/R1

--- Page 63 Text ---
Submersion and Aquatic Breathing
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Depth charger relay 1. Arrange swimmers in pairs or teams. • Practise individually before working in pairs or KS2 PE 1a/1b
2. In each pair or team, the first swimmer holds a teams. KS1 PSHE 4b
mushroom float (curl up in a tight ball with the • Focus on controlled exhalation to allow the body
face in the water) and exhales to submerge to the to sink.
bottom of the pool. • The winning pair or team is the one that completes
3. The next swimmer repeats the action. the task first.
4. Continue until all swimmers have repeated the
action.
Unit 6 Checklist
√
Before moving to unit 7, the learners should be able to complete the Submerge whilst holding the breath.
activities in the following checklist. Unit 7 builds on the outcomes Holding the side of the pool with both hands, bob up and down
achieved in this stage; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve 10 consecutive times showing controlled inhalation and exhala-
these outcomes before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the tion.
case, you need to consider whether it is possible to establish a number
Holding a float under each arm, kick the legs up and down and
of groups appropriate to different stages of development. This may
travel for 5 metres whilst blowing an egg flip or similar object.
have implications for staffing. Where it is not possible, you should aim
to differentiate subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate to Participate in a number of games requiring submersion of the
the different abilities within a single group. head.
In shallow water, collect objects from the bottom of the pool.
51

--- Page 64 Text ---
This page intentionally left blank.

--- Page 65 Text ---
Unit
7
gliding and Developing
the Body Position
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
7.1: Be able to glide on the front with the face in the water and the
arms at the sides and extended, and be able to float on the back
with the arms at the sides.
7.2: Be able to glide on the front and the back combined with kick-
ing and rotation.
7.3: Be able to glide on the back combined with kicking and with
sculling action.
53

--- Page 66 Text ---
A
chieving the desired body position for each of the strokes is essen-
NC reference
tial for maximising propulsion and minimising resistance. An
effective body position incorporates good streamlining and breathing PE knowledge, skills and understanding
control to develop smooth, relaxed movement through the water, but
Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones KS2 1a
teachers and swimmers often overlook this in the desire to move quickly
to the recognised strokes. The body position for each of the strokes Performing actions and skills with more consistent control KS2 1b
varies. Swimmers need to be sufficiently skilled to achieve the most and quality
horizontal position possible, taking into account the particular require- PSHE knowledge, skills and understanding
ments of each of the strokes. For example, the body position for front
Listening to other people, and playing and working coop- KS1 4b
crawl and backstroke is close to the horizontal, whereas breaststroke
eratively
is more inclined to accommodate the action of the legs. The ability to
glide in the water, showing good control and balance, is an integral part
of developing the body position.
Linking to the national Curriculum
requirements
During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
to Use This Book.
54

--- Page 67 Text ---
Gliding and Developing the Body Position
OUtCOme 7.1
Be able to glide on the front with the face in the water and the arms at the sides and extended,
and be able to float on the back with the arms at the sides.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; flotation aids if required; hoops
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Push and glide from the 1. Swimmers stand with one foot forward and one • Look for flat body position with the face in the KS2 PE 1a/1b
pool floor back, then push off from the pool floor to show a water and eyes looking to the bottom of the pool.
horizontal position with the arms at the sides and • Encourage opening the eyes.
with the face in the water. • Have swimmers hold the position as long as pos-
2. Repeat with the arms extended in a stretched posi- sible.
tion and the face in the water.
3. Repeat on the back with the arms at the sides. • On the back, stress head back, eyes looking at the
ceiling and abdomen to the surface of the water.
• Use floats to assist only if required.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/5.1c1/452169/JRCS/R3-alw E5289/Lawton/5.1c2/452212/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/5.1c3/452213/JRCS/R2-alw
55

--- Page 68 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Push and glide from the 1. Swimmers push to a horizontal body position on • Ask swimmers to set personal challenges related KS2 PE 1a/1b
wall the front, starting with one foot on the floor and to distance; mark the distances covered and have
one on the wall, with arms at the sides. swimmers aim to increase the distance; let them
2. Repeat with the arms fully extended in front (see practise individually.
first row of illustrations). • Ask swimmers what they can do to go further.
3. Repeat on the back but with the arms at the sides • Ask swimmers to experiment with different body
only (see second row of illustrations). positions (arms out to the sides) to show benefits of
4. Try gliding underwater and then gliding through being stretched and streamlined.
hoops. • When gliding underwater, encourage submersion
at the side before pushing off; encourage bending
the knees to tuck position before pushing the legs
straight.
• Have swimmers work in pairs with one person hold-
ing the hoop whilst the other glides through the
hoop. Ask the person holding the hoop to keep it
vertical and hold it midway between the surface
and the floor; ask the person performing the glide
to push down under the water (rather than push
along the surface) and to keep the eyes open
throughout.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/5.1c2/452212/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/5.1c3/452213/JRCS/R2-alw
56
E5289/Lawton/7.1b1/452180/JRCS/R4-alw

--- Page 69 Text ---
Gliding and Developing the Body Position
AAccttiivviittyy aanndd pprrooggrreessssiioonn DDeessccrriippttiioonn TTeeaacchhiinngg ttiippss NNCC rreeffeerreennccee
PPuusshh aanndd gglliiddee ffrroomm tthhee
wwaallll ((ccoonnttiinnuueedd))
PPuusshh aanndd gglliiddee ccoommbbiinneedd 11.. SSwwiimmmmeerrss ppuusshh aanndd gglliiddee oonn tthhee ffrroonntt wwiitthh tthhee •• LLooookk ffoorr ccoonnttrroolllleedd rroottaattiioonn uussiinngg tthhee hhiippss aanndd KKSS22 PPEE 11aa//11bb
wwiitthh rroottaattiioonn aarrmmss aatt tthhee ssiiddeess aanndd rroottaattee oonnttoo tthhee bbaacckk.. sshhoouullddeerrss..
22.. RReeppeeaatt wwiitthh tthhee aarrmmss eexxtteennddeedd aanndd ssttrreeaammlliinneedd.. •• EEnnccoouurraaggee sswwiimmmmeerrss ttoo hhoolldd tthhee gglliiddee ppoossiittiioonn ffooll--
33.. PPrrooggrreessss ttoo rroottaattiioonn ffrroomm ffrroonntt,, ttoo bbaacckk,, ttoo ffrroonntt,, lloowwiinngg tthhee rroottaattiioonn..
aanndd ssoo oonn..
E5289/Lawton/7.1c2/452182/JRCS/R2
E5289/Lawton/7.1c1/452181/JRCS/R2
GGlliiddiinngg rreellaayyss 11.. DDiivviiddee sswwiimmmmeerrss iinnttoo tteeaammss aanndd iinnttrroodduuccee aa rreellaayy •• LLooookk ffoorr sswwiimmmmeerrss wwhhoo sshhooww ggoooodd ssttrreeaammlliinniinngg KKSS22 PPEE 11aa//11bb
bbaasseedd oonn ddiissttaannccee ccoovveerreedd bbyy tthhee wwhhoollee tteeaamm.. aanndd aasskk tthheemm ttoo eexxppllaaiinn wwhhyy tthheeyy ttrraavveell aa lloonngg wwaayy.. KKSS11 PPSSHHEE 44bb
22.. TThhee ffiirrsstt sswwiimmmmeerr gglliiddeess aass ffaarr aass ppoossssiibbllee,, tthhee •• AAllllooww sswwiimmmmeerrss ttiimmee ttoo pprraaccttiissee iinnddiivviidduuaallllyy aanndd aass
sseeccoonndd sswwiimmmmeerr ccoonnttiinnuueess ffrroomm wwhheerree ffiirrsstt ppeerrssoonn aa tteeaamm,, aanndd aaiimm ttoo iinnccrreeaassee tthhee ddiissttaannccee tthheeyy ccoovveerr..
ffiinniisshheess,, aanndd ssoo oonn..
33.. UUssee aa mmaarrkkeerr ttoo rreeccoorrdd ddiissttaannccee ccoovveerreedd bbyy tthhee
wwhhoollee tteeaamm.. E5289/Lawton/7.1d2/452184/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/7.1d3/453025/JRCS/R3-alw
E5289/Lawton/7.1b1/452180/JRCS/R4-alw
57

--- Page 70 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 7.2
Be able to glide on the front and the back combined with kicking and rotation.
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Gliding combined with Swimmers repeat gliding on the back with the arms at • Revisit floating on the back if required. KS2 PE 1a/1b
alternating kick (up and the sides and add up-and-down leg action. • Stress horizontal position.
down) on the back • Encourage swimmers to have the back of the head
in the water and eyes looking at the ceiling (similar
to resting the head on a pillow).
• Stress that legs should be almost straight and kick
up and down.
• Use a float held across the abdomen or a woggle
held under the armpits only if required.
Gliding combined with 1. Swimmers repeat gliding on the front with the • Encourage swimmers to keep the face in the water KS2 PE 1a/1b
alternating kick (up and arms at the sides and add up-and-down leg action. throughout and eyes looking down and slightly
down) on the front 2. Progress to gliding with the arms fully extended, forwards.
and add up-and-down leg action. • When breath is required, swimmers stand and then
continue.
• Look for horizontal position with controlled kicking.
E5289/Lawton/7.1c1/452181/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/7.2a2/453027/JRCS/R3-alw
58
E5289/Lawton/7.2b/452186/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/7.2c/452187/JRCS/R2

--- Page 71 Text ---
Gliding and Developing the Body Position
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Combining kicking with 1. Swimmers start with kicking on the front with the Look for controlled rotation initiated by the hips and KS2 PE 1a/1b
rotation arms at the sides. shoulders.
2. When a breath is required, they rotate onto the
back and continue kicking, then return to a front
kicking position.
OUtCOme 7.3
Be able to glide on the back combined with kicking and with sculling action.
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Sculling 1. Swimmers stand in shallow water with the shoul- Ask swimmers to perform a sideways figure-of-8 KS2 PE 1a/1b
ders submerged and arms stretched out in front. action; thumbs are down as the hands move outwards
2. Start with the palms facing outwards and thumbs and thumbs are up as they move inwards.
facing down.
3. Move the hands outwards to just wider than the
shoulders and then rotate the hands so that the
thumbs are facing upwards and palms are facing
each other.
4. Move the hands back together.
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4.
(continued)
59
E5289/Lawton/7.3a1/452188/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/7.3a2/452189/JRCS/R2

--- Page 72 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Gliding on the back 1. Swimmers glide with the arms at the sides and • Allow a slight-up-and down leg action if required. KS2 PE 1a/1b
combined with sculling travel head first using a sculling action with the • Emphasise that hips should be close to the surface.
arms and hands.
2. The arms are almost straight and close to the sides
of the body; as hands move inwards, push the
water towards the feet.
E5289/Lawton/7.3b/452190/JRCS/R2
60

--- Page 73 Text ---
Gliding and Developing the Body Position
Unit 7 Checklist
√
Before moving to unit 8, the learners should be able to complete the Push and glide in a horizontal position on the front with the arms
activities in the following checklist. Unit 8 builds on the outcomes extended in front.
achieved in this unit; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve these Push and glide in a horizontal position on the back with the arms
outcomes before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the by the sides.
case, you need to consider whether it is possible to establish a number
Travel for 10 metres on the back with the arms by the sides and
of groups appropriate to different stages of development. This may
legs kicking up and down.
have implications for staffing. Where it is not possible, you should aim
to differentiate subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate to Travel for 10 metres on the front with the arms by the sides and
the different abilities within a single group. face in the water, kicking the legs up and down. Swimmers are
allowed to stand when a breath is required and then continue to
cover the 10 metres.
Travel for 10 metres on the front with the arms extended in front
and the face in the water, kicking the legs up and down. Swimmers
are allowed to stand when a breath is required and then continue
to cover the 10 metres.
Travel for 5 metres on the front with the arms by the sides and legs
kicking up and down, rotating from front to back and then return-
ing to the front.
Travel for 5 metres on the back using a sculling action with the
arms and hands; slight up-and-down leg action is permitted.
61

--- Page 74 Text ---
This page intentionally left blank.

--- Page 75 Text ---
Unit
8
Developing Backstroke
and Front Crawl
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, the learners should have met the following out-
comes:
8.1: Be able to swim on the back with the legs kicking up and
down and the arms performing an alternating over-the-water
recovery.
8.2: Be able to swim on the front with the legs kicking up and
down and the arms performing an alternating over-the-water
recovery.
8.3: Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills appro-
priate to this stage of development.
8.4: Describe each stroke covered in this unit, and suggest ways to
bring about improvement.
63

--- Page 76 Text ---
T
hese strokes are often referred to as the alternating strokes because When introducing and developing the strokes, a systematic approach
of the nature of the arm and leg movements. This unit emphasises is helpful. BLABT (body, legs, arms, breathing, and timing) provides a
not only the requirements for each stroke but also the similarities and structure to help you to observe the stroke as a means of bringing about
the positive transfer that can occur between them. Whilst it is an over- improvement and also a sequence to teach the various aspects of a stroke.
simplification to state that front crawl is backstroke turned over, this For example, if a swimmer is learning front crawl, achieving an appropri-
statement can immediately help swimming teachers to envisage how ate body position is an important first step. You should observe the body
learning in one area can transfer to another. The leg actions are very position; if the desired position has not been achieved, then address this
similar, and the arm action in both strokes requires the arms to travel out problem before moving on to the leg action. Similarly, you should address
and over the water (known as an over-the-water recovery). These points establishing an appropriate leg action before moving on to the arm action.
illustrate some of the similarities in the strokes. These similarities help
learners to move between the two strokes with confidence, particularly
Linking to the national Curriculum
as the previous units have brought them to a point where they are at
home in the water and are comfortable on and under the water. requirements
To enable the swimmer to move from the readiness stage to the
achievement of basic technique, you should use a variety of progressive During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
practices. At this stage it is recommended that you use a part–whole the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
approach; in other words, develop certain aspects of the stroke before to Use This Book.
putting it all together into the full stroke. At times it may be appropri-
ate, normally having watched a good demonstration, to try the whole
stroke followed by practices specifically related to arms or legs (whole– NC reference
part–whole approach).
PE knowledge, skills and understanding
Having completed the key skills in the previous units, the learners
will already be comfortable floating on the front and back and will Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones KS2 1a
have experienced the feeling of being balanced in the water. Subject
Performing actions and skills with more consistent control KS2 1b
to the ability to float on the back, it is best to introduce backstroke
and quality
first because it presents the least problems; the face is out of the water
Planning, using and adapting strategies, tactics and com- KS2 2a
and breathing is unhindered. Although at this stage learners should be
positional ideas for individual, pair, small-group and small-
comfortable with putting the face in the water and aspects of aquatic
team activities
breathing, swimming on the back means that they have fewer things
to think about and can therefore focus on the actions of the arms and Identifying what makes a performance effective KS2 3a
legs.
Suggesting improvements based on this information KS2 3b
The first part to consider is the leg action, referred to as kicking,
because it follows logically from the previous stage that focused on PSHE knowledge, skills and understanding
body position and gliding. Kicking is important because it helps the
Listening to other people, and playing and working coop- KS1 4b
swimmer to maintain the horizontal streamlined position, thus reduc-
eratively
ing resistance.
64

--- Page 77 Text ---
Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
OUtCOme 8.1
Be able to swim on the back with the legs kicking up and down and the arms performing an alternating
over-the-water recovery.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Floating on the back 1. Revise floating on the back with the arms out at the • Focus on achieving a horizontal position. KS2 PE 1a/1b
sides (start float). • Allow a slight up-and-down leg action if required to
2. Repeat with the arms and legs stretched and maintain horizontal position.
together (pencil float).
Push and glide on the 1. Revise the push and glide with the arms at the • Stress eyes looking at the ceiling and stomach to KS2 PE 1a/1b
back sides; add kicking. (See unit 7 for more guidance.) the surface of the water.
2. Repeat with one arm by the side and one arm • Emphasise kicking action to maintain horizontal
extended above the head resting on the water sur- position.
face; add kicking.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/8.1a/452191/JRCS/R4-ke
65

--- Page 78 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Single-arm backstroke 1. Swimmers push and glide on the back with both • Stress the vertical recovery of the arm over the KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms at the sides, add kicking and then use one water, controlled hand entry overhead at full
arm only in a circular action over and under the stretch in line with the shoulder and pulling to the
water. side of the body to finish at the hips.
2. Repeat with the other arm. • As the arm returns to the side of the body, ask
swimmers to pause the arm action and to kick;
repeat the arm action after a slight pause.
• For swimmers who are struggling to maintain a
horizontal body position, consider revising horizon-
tal floating position (see unit 5 for further guidance)
or allow them to hold a float across the chest with
one arm.
Controlled backstroke 1. Swimmers push and glide on the back with one • As with the previous practice, once the arms have KS2 PE 1a/1b
starting with one arm arm at the side and one arm extended above the changed positions, ask swimmers to pause and kick
extended head resting on the water surface (as in push and the legs to re-establish the horizontal balanced
glide on the back, point 2). position.
2. Add kicking. • Keep movements slow and controlled.
3. The extended arm pulls through the water at the
same time as the other arm recovers over the water
(the arms change positions).
E5289/Lawton/8.1b/452192/JRCS/R4-ke
66
E5289/Lawton/8.1a/452191/JRCS/R4-ke E5289/Lawton/8.1c2/453520/JRCS/R4-ke

--- Page 79 Text ---
Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Full-stroke backstroke Swimmers repeat the previous practice but aim to • Ask swimmers to combine the arms and legs into a KS2 PE 1a/1b
keep the arms moving in a continuous movement. smooth, coordinated movement.
• Start over short distances and gradually increase.
• Aim for a slow, controlled stroke.
Understanding the stroke 1. Arrange learners in pairs for reciprocal teaching. To assist the observation, ask them to look at body KS2 PE 3a/3b
2. Ask each learner to observe the swimmer swim- position and leg and arm actions.
ming the stroke and to make suggestions for
improvement.
What to Look For: Technical Aspects entering the water first and palm facing outwards; hand and
At this stage, the technical aspects should be kept to a minimum. How- arm pull round by the side to the thigh; hand leaves the water
ever, it is important to have a mental picture of what the stroke should thumb first to start the recovery. The technical description of the
look like. The main points are as follows: arm action is referred to as a straight-arm pull and is appropriate
for learners at this stage of their development. However, of all
• Body: Almost horizontal, stretched and streamlined; chest at the
of the four strokes, the difference between the arm action in the
surface with hips slightly submerged; back of the head pillowed
learner and the competent swimmer is greater in backstroke than
in the water with eyes looking upwards towards the ceiling.
in the other strokes. As the swimmers become more confident
• Legs and feet: Horizontal, close to the surface, knees under the and competent, consider introducing the bent-arm action (see
water with feet and toes pointed; steady, continuous, alternating unit 10 for details).
action initiated at the hips with slight bend at the knee; small
• Breathing: Regular, controlled breathing.
splash behind.
• Timing: Smooth, continuous movement with kicking, pulling
• Arms: Controlled, alternating, circular action, over the water
and breathing coordinated and controlled.
with hand entering overhead at full stretch with little finger
67

--- Page 80 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 8.2
Be able to swim on the front with the legs kicking up and down
and the arms performing an alternating over-the-water recovery.
When you introduce the front crawl, begin without the breathing because it complicates matters at this stage of development. It is clearly a vital
skill, but it is introduced once the learners are able to show coordinated arm and leg movements over short distances. Until that point, they should
swim with the face in the water and stand when a breath is required.
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Pencil float on the front Revise front floating position with arms and legs Look for a relaxed floating position and confidence KS2 PE 1a/1b
stretched and together. with the face in the water.
Push and glide on the 1. Swimmers push and glide with the arms at sides • Swimmers should push from the side of the pool or KS2 PE 1a/1b
front and the face in the water, then add kicking. from the pool floor.
2. Repeat with both arms extended in streamlined, • Emphasise no breathing, and when a breath is
stretched position and face in the water, then add required, have swimmers stand and then continue.
kicking. • Look for a horizontal position with the head still
and continuous leg action.
• Experiment with a big splash from the legs, then a
small splash and silent kicking.
• Tell swimmers to aim for a small splash behind.
Push and glide with the Swimmers push and glide with one arm extended and • One shoulder will be above the water and the other KS2 PE 1a/1b
body on the side one arm by the side, the face in the water and the eyes shoulder directly below and under the water.
looking to the bottom of the pool. • Swimmers should push from the side of pool or
from the pool floor.
• Look for controlled, balanced position.
68 E5289/Lawton/8.2a1/452195/JRCS/R3-alw E5289/Lawton/8.2a2/452197/JRCS/R3-alw

--- Page 81 Text ---
Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Kicking duel 1. Swimmers work in pairs with a woggle or a float for • Ensure that the arms are straight and the face is in KS2 PE 1a/1b
each pair. the water throughout. KS1 PSHE 4b
2. Swimmers hold on to opposite ends of the woggle • Discuss which kicking action is the most effective—
or float and, using a front crawl kicking action only, when feet come out of the water and make a large
aim to force their partners backwards. splash or when feet remain in the water and there is
reduced splash.
Arm action standing 1. Swimmers stand in shallow water and practise arm • Look for a still head position and smooth alternat- KS2 PE 1a/1b
action with the face in the water. ing arm action.
2. The hand slides into the water between the shoul- • Ask swimmers to use their hands and arms to pull
ders and the head, fingers first. The hands pulls their body through the water while walking.
slightly outwards and then under the body and
towards the thighs. The arms move over the water,
close to the body and back to the start position.
3. Continue whilst walking across the pool.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/8.2b/452198/JRCS/R3-ke
69

--- Page 82 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Single-arm front crawl 1. Swimmers repeat the push and glide on the front • Focus on controlled hand entry in an extended KS2 PE 1a/1b
with both arms extended, legs kicking and the face position between the shoulder and the head.
in the water. • Use the hand as a paddle to pull and push the
2. Keeping one arm extended in front, they perform water towards the feet.
a single-arm action with no breathing, then repeat • The hand passes the hip before the elbow lifts to
with the other arm. start the recovery.
Catch-up front crawl 1. Swimmers repeat the push and glide on the front • Only one arm should be working at once, and KS2 PE 1a/1b
E5289/Lawton/8.2c1/452199/JRCwS/iRth4- kbeoth arms exte E n 5 d 28 e 9 d / , L l a e w g to s n k /8 ic .2 k c in 2/ g 4 5 a 2 n 2 d 0 0 t / h J e R C fa S c /R e 3-alw the nonworkin E g 5 2 a 8 r 9 m /L s a h w o to u n l / d 8. 2 re c3 m /4 a 5 in 22 i 0 n 1 / t J h R e C f S ro /R n 3 t - alw
in the water. extended position.
2. Keeping one arm extended in front, they perform • Encourage swimmers to maintain continuous leg
single-arm action with no breathing. action throughout.
3. Once the arm has returned to the extended posi-
tion, repeat the same action with the other arm.
E5289/Lawton/8.2c4/453521/JRCS/R3-alw
70

--- Page 83 Text ---
Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Full-stroke front crawl 1. Arms and legs are combined into a smooth, coordi- • Establish a smooth action with the head still. KS2 PE 1a/1b
nated movement. • Once a stroke pattern is established, ask swimmers
2. Ask swimmers to cover short distances without to count the number of strokes required to cover a
breathing and to stand when a breath is required. set distance.
• Aim to reduce the number of strokes by making the
stroke longer and smoother.
E5289/Lawton/8.2d1/452202/JRCS/R3-alw E5289/Lawton/8.2d2/452203/JRCS/R3-alw E5289/Lawton/8.2d3/452204/JRCS/R3-alw
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/8.2d4/452205/JRCS/R3-alw E5289/Lawton/8.2d5/452206/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/8.2d6/452207/JRCS/R3-alw
71

--- Page 84 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Breathing 1. Revise bobbing practice with the hands holding on • Ensure that bobbing is continuous; swimmers KS2 PE 1a/1b
to the rail or side; aim for 10 consecutive bobs with should not stop to wipe the face. Ask them to open
controlled exhalation and inhalation. (See unit 6 for their eyes each time they come up to breathe.
more guidance.)
2. Standing, swimmers hold the rail or side with one • Emphasise full exhalation when the face is in the
hand, put the face in the water and then turn the water; look for a turning action of the head and not
head to the side to breathe. a lifting action.
3. Standing away from the side, swimmers combine • Breath is taken as the arm on the breathing side
the arm action with breathing and then add walk- completes the push through to the hips.
ing. • Breath is taken on the side of the working arm; if
4. Swimmers perform single-arm front crawl (see pre- required, swimmers can pause in the breathing
vious activity) combined with breathing. position until a breath is taken.
• Swimmers select a preferred side to breathe or
experiment with either side.
Full-stroke front crawl 1. Swimmers complete the full stroke over a short dis- • Only increase the distance covered once the KS2 PE 1a/1b
tance and take one breath. breathing action is coordinated with the movement
2. Then, they gradually increase the distance covered of the arms.
and take two breaths, then three and so on. • Gradually work towards the swimmers being able
to breathe every stroke.
• Discuss why it is important to breathe regularly and
how the heart provides the working muscles with a
supply of oxygen.
UnderEs5t2a8n9d/Lianwgto tnh/8e. 2set1ro/4k5e30281/J. RACrSr/aRn3g-kee learners in pEai5r2s8 f9o/rL arewctoipn/r8o.c2ae2l /t4e5a3c0h2i9n/JgR.CS/R3T-koe assist the observation, ask them to look at body KS2 PE 3a/3b
2. Ask each learner to observe the swimmer swim- position and leg and arm actions.
ming the stroke and to make suggestions for
improvement.
72

--- Page 85 Text ---
Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Team timed swim 1. Arrange swimmers in groups of three or four. • Ask each team to work out the best combination; KS2 PE
2. The challenge is to swim as far as possible in a set record their initial attempt, then allow time to 2a/3a/3b
time. Swimmers can select front crawl or back- experiment.
stroke. • Encourage swimmers to try different strokes to find
3. Each swimmer swims for 30 seconds; swimmers’ out which one is best.
distances are combined to arrive at total distance • Compare the initial attempt with the final attempt,
covered for the team. then discuss differences.
What to Look For: Technical Aspects • Arms: Alternating action with controlled, sliding, fingers-first entry
At this stage, the technical aspects should be kept to a minimum. How- between shoulder and head; hand pulls slightly outwards and then
ever, it is important to have a mental picture of what the stroke should under the body and towards the thigh; elbow is higher than the
look like. The main points are as follows: hand throughout; elbow exits the water first followed by wrist and
hand; arm recovers over the water, remaining close to the body.
• Body: Horizontal, stretched and streamlined; face in the water
• Breathing: Controlled turn of the head to the side; head returns
and eyes looking downward and slightly forwards; head central
to central position; exhalation occurs when face is in the water;
except when breathing.
regular pattern.
• Legs and feet: Close to the surface and in line with the body;
• Timing: Smooth, continuous movement with kicking, pulling
continuous, alternating kick initiated at the hips with slight bend
and breathing coordinated and controlled.
at the knee; toes pointed with small splash.
73

--- Page 86 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 8.3
Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills appropriate to this stage of development.
Equipment and Resources
Assistant in the water if available
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Entering the water safely 1. Swimmers enter feet first from crouching position; • Ensure that water depth is between the stomach KS2 PE 1a/1b
using a controlled jump gradually adjust until entry is from standing posi- and shoulders.
tion. • Remind swimmers to start with the toes curled over
2. Experiment with different jumping entries: Show a the edge of the pool.
wide shape (star) and thin shape (pencil), and aim • Learners should bend knees for a soft landing.
for distance. • An assistant in the water may be helpful.
• Move to deeper water as jumps become more chal-
lenging.
• Discuss issues related to jumping into unknown
water and from heights; stress using a sliding entry
when entering unknown water to reduce the risk of
hitting objects not visible from the side.
Log rolls 1. Revise push and glide with the arms fully extended • Rotation is initiated through movement of the hips, KS2 PE 1a/1b
and the face in the water. Repeat and include rota- shoulders and head.
tion from front to back. Rotate from front to back • Swimmers should maintain a stretched position.
and return to front (from a horizontal stretched • Ask swimmers to work towards a 360-degree rota-
position rotate through 360 degrees). tion without a pause at 180 degrees.
2. Swimmers work in pairs to develop synchronised • Learners organise start and finish times. Allow a
log rolls. gap between rotations, but aim to maintain a hori-
zontal position throughout. Learners set personal
challenges for the number of rolls.
• Ask learners to observe and describe what others do.
74
E5289/Lawton/8.3a1/452209/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/8.3a2/452210/JRCS/R3-alw

--- Page 87 Text ---
Developing Backstroke and Front Crawl
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Swimming underwater 1. In shallow water, swimmers push and glide to • Emphasise touching the pool floor with the hands. KS2 PE 1a/1b
touch the bottom of the pool and stand.
2. They push and glide through a hoop standing on • If required, start with a hoop held just below the
the bottom of the pool. surface.
3. They push and glide and swim through a hoop • Gradually increase the depth of the hoop and dis-
standing on the bottom of the pool. tance to be covered underwater.
Handstand Swimmers attempt a handstand from push and glide • Ensure that water depth is between the stomach KS2 PE 1a/1b
or from standing. and shoulders.
• Initially show a handstand with the legs in tucked
position, and gradually encourage a fully extended
position.
• Encourage keeping the eyes open throughout.
E5289/Lawton/8.3b1/452216/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/8.3b2/452217/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/8.3b3/452218/JRCS/R1
75

--- Page 88 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 8.4
Describe each stroke covered in this unit, and suggest ways to bring about improvement.
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Reciprocal teaching 1. Swimmers are arranged in pairs; one from each pair • Allow the swimmers to take ownership of this activ- KS2 PE 3a/3b
is in the water and the other is on the poolside. ity; the most important element is the process of
2. The person in the water swims one width of front developing a greater understanding of the strokes.
crawl whilst the partner observes. • Intervene only if you think the guidance being
3. At the end of the width the person on the poolside given is incorrect.
describes the stroke to the partner and makes sug- • Discuss practices or activities that all learners can
gestions on how the stroke might be improved. use to bring about improvement for both strokes.
4. The person in the water repeats the width and
attempts to implement the suggestions made.
5. Learners change roles and repeat the activity.
6. Repeat using backstroke.
Unit 8 Checklist
√
Before moving to unit 9, the learners should be able to complete the Swim full-stroke backstroke showing a smooth and controlled
activities in the following checklist. Unit 9 builds on the outcomes coordination of the arms and legs for a minimum of 10 metres.
achieved in this unit; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve these Swim full-stroke front crawl showing a smooth and controlled
outcomes before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the coordination of the arms and legs and breathing for a minimum of
case, you need to consider whether it is possible to establish a number 10 metres.
of groups appropriate to different stages of development. This may
Perform a jumping entry showing control in flight and on landing.
have implications for staffing. Where it is not possible, you should aim
to differentiate subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate to From a horizontal stretched floating position, rotate through 360
the different abilities within a single group. degrees and regain the standing position.
Swim under the surface of the water for a distance of 5 metres.
Be able to give a basic description of front crawl and backstroke
along with some activities or practices that can be used to improve
technique.
76

--- Page 89 Text ---
Unit
9
Developing Breaststroke
and Butterfly
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
9.1: Perform a basic breaststroke with control.
9.2: Perform a basic butterfly with control.
9.3: Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills appro-
priate to this stage of development.
77

--- Page 90 Text ---
B
ecause of the nature of the arm and leg movements involved in the When introducing and developing the strokes, a systematic approach
breaststroke and the butterfly, they are referred to as the simul- is helpful. BLABT (body, legs, arms, breathing and timing) provides a
taneous strokes. Technically, breaststroke is the most complex of the structure to help you to observe the stroke as a means of bringing about
swimming strokes and requires considerable coordination on behalf of improvement and also a sequence to teach the different aspects of a
the learner. As with front crawl and backstroke, to enable swimmers to stroke. For example, if a swimmer is learning breaststroke, achieving an
move from the readiness stage to the achievement of basic technique, appropriate body position is an essential first step. You should observe
you should use progressive practices. At this stage you should use a the body position; if the desired position has not been achieved, then
part–whole approach; in other words, develop certain aspects of the address the problem before moving on to the leg action. Similarly, you
stroke before putting it all together into the full stroke. Because of the should address establishing an appropriate leg action before moving on
complex movements required for breaststroke in particular, progressive to the arm action and so on.
steps are outlined to ensure that technical errors, which can be extremely
difficult to eradicate once established, can be avoided.
Linking to the national Curriculum
Breaststroke is the only one of the four competitive strokes where the
legs and feet do not move up and down or where the toes are not pointed requirements
throughout the whole kicking movement. It is the most complex of the
kicking actions, and it is sometimes helpful to introduce the movement During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
on land before moving to the water. However, the land practices should the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
be a short-term activity, and soon afterwards swimmers should perform to Use This Book.
the appropriate movements in the water.
When introducing the leg action for the breaststroke, floats or woggles
NC reference
are helpful. They provide a stable and balanced position in the water,
allowing learners to focus on the required movements. PE knowledge, skills and understanding
Primary schoolteachers often ignore butterfly based on the misguided
Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones KS2 1a
belief that young children will find the stroke too difficult. This unit
focuses on developing whole-body movements, which help to overcome Performing actions and skills with more consistent KS2 1b
some of the strength requirements of this particular stroke. Butterfly control and quality
is often referred to as dolphin as a result of the similarity in the move- Identifying what makes a performance effective KS2 3a
ments. Keeping this in mind can help you and your learners to picture
Suggesting improvements based on this information KS2 3b
the type of body movements required.
78

--- Page 91 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
OUtCOme 9.1
Perform a basic breaststroke with control.
Equipment and Resources
Pool divider to prevent access to deeper water; floats or woggles
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Pencil float on the front Swimmers practise front floating position with the Look for a relaxed floating position with the face in KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms and legs stretched and together. the water.
Pushing and gliding on Swimmers practise pushing and gliding with both • Look for a strong push from the wall. KS2 PE 1a/1b
the front arms extended in a streamlined, stretched position • Measure the distance covered, and encourage
and with the face in the water. swimmers to increase distance.
Feeling the difference Swimmers sit on the side of the pool with the legs • Ask swimmers to move between the positions and KS2 PE 1a/1b
stretched and together and practise various foot to feel the difference.
positions, moving from the feet and toes extended • Have them attempt it with the eyes open and then
(pointed) to the feet and toes dorsiflexed (flexed; see the eyes closed.
left illustration) and everted (heels together and toes
turned out to a V shape; see right illustration).
(continued)
79
E5289/Lawton/9.1a/453030/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.1b/453031/JRCS/R2

--- Page 92 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Making circles 1. With swimmers still sitting on the side of the pool Check to ensure that the leg actions are simultaneous KS2 PE 1a/1b
practise the breaststroke leg action. Start with the and symmetrical.
swimmers sitting with legs stretched.
2. Encourage the swimmers to draw heels towards
the bottom and show dorsiflexed, everted position
(in which the feet are flexed, the heels touch and
the toes rotate outward, forming a V shape).
3. Kick out and back in a circular movement until the
feet and legs are together and fully extended.
Leg action on the back in 1. Provide each swimmer with two floats or a woggle. • The legs should kick simultaneously and the actions KS2 PE 1a/1b
a vertical position 2. Holding a float under each arm or a woggle behind should be symmetrical.
the back and under the arms, swimmers adopt a • Encourage swimmers to make slow movements
vertical position in the water and perform the kick- to ensure accuracy. The kick should finish with the
ing action downwards to the bottom of the pool. legs together and fully extended.
• Encourage a slight pause after each kick.
E5289/Lawton/9.1c1/452219/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.1c2/452220/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.1c3/452221/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.1c4/452222JRCS/R2
80

--- Page 93 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Leg action on the back Swimmers lie on the back supported by a float under • Focus on the circular pattern of the leg action: The KS2 PE 1a/1b
each arm or a woggle and practise the leg action on legs move outwards and backwards in a circular
the back. motion with the feet turned out.
• Have swimmers finish with the heels together, the
legs extended and toes pointed.
Leg action on the front— Swimmers lie on the front with a float under each • Ask swimmers to pause after each leg action and to KS2 PE 1a/1b
two floats arm (knuckles together in front) and practise the leg hold the extended position.
action. • Encourage them to perform slow, circular, sym-
metrical actions.
E5289/Lawton/9.1c5/453581/JRCS/R2
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/9.1c6/453582/JRCS/R3-ke
81

--- Page 94 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Leg action on the front— Swimmers lie on the front, holding one float with the Encourage keeping the leg action continuous to help KS2 PE 1a/1b
one float arms extended, and they perform the leg action. maintain appropriate body position.
Introducing the arm 1. Swimmers stand in the water (chest to shoulder Demonstrate the action to the learners. Initially they KS2 PE 1a/1b
action depth), leaning forwards with the hands and arms copy you with the head up. Once they have achieved
just below the surface. They perform a short circu- the basic action, introduce it with the face in the
lar movement with the hands leading and elbows water.
kept high in the water throughout the pull.
2. The hands pull out, back and then come in and
E5289/Lawton/9.1c7/453583/JRCuSn/Rd2er the chest in a circular type movement before
stretching forwards to a fully extended position; as
the hands stretch forward the face is in the water
and the eyes look forwards.
3. They take a breath as the hands pull in towards the
body and the shoulders are high.
4. The face and head return to the water as the arms
push forwards.
82
E5289/Lawton/9.1d1/452224/JRCS/R2E5289/Lawton/9.1d2/452225/JRCS/R2E5289/Lawton/9.1d3/452226/JRCS/R2E5289/Lawton/9.1d4/452227/JRCS/R1E5289/Lawton/9.1d1/452224/JRCS/R2

--- Page 95 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Introducing the arm 5. Swimmers repeat the sequence, this time walking
action (continued) and using the arm action to pull the body forwards.
6. Swimmers combine the sequence with breathing.
Introducing the full stroke 1. Swimmers push and glide, adding one complete • Whilst it is possible to swim breaststroke with the KS2 PE 1a/1b
arm action and then one leg kick, then stretch and head up, encourage the learner to swim with the
glide. face in the water.
2. They gradually increase the number of pulls and • For the coordination of the stroke, remind swim-
kicks. mers to think, Pull, breathe, kick, glide.
• Emphasise an extended glide between strokes.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/9.1e1/452229/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.1e2/452230/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.1e3/452231/JRCS/R2
E5289/Lawton/9.1e1/452229/JRCS/R2
83

--- Page 96 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Stroke counting Swimmers count the number of strokes required to • Encourage swimmers to focus on the instep push- KS2 PE 1a/1b
cover a set distance and aim to reduce it. ing the water backwards.
• Encourage them to kick back hard to propel the
body forwards.
• Discuss ways to reduce the number of strokes, such
as to kick and pull harder, glide longer or use better
streamlining.
• Show the swimmer who does the least number of
strokes and discuss why this happened. Have swim-
mers repeat the activity with the intention of reduc-
ing the number of strokes.
Understanding the stroke 1. Arrange learners in pairs for reciprocal teaching. To assist the observation, ask learners to look at body KS2 PE 3a/3b
2. Ask each learner to observe the swimmer’s stroke position, leg and arm actions and breathing.
and to make suggestions for improvement.
Things to Look For: Technical Aspects • Arms: From the stretched position with the palms facing slightly
At this stage the technical aspects should be kept to a minimum. How- outwards and down, the hands press out to the side and slightly
ever, it is important to have a mental picture of what the stroke should down to a Y position just wide of the shoulders; hands move down-
look like. The main points are as follows: wards and inwards in a circular movement and come in and under
• Body: Stretched, streamlined with the face in the water; head the body with the elbows and upper arms squeezed in towards each
and upper body lifts as the arms pull in towards the body and other before stretching smoothly forwards to the start position.
breath is taken; at the end of each stroke the body should be flat • Breathing: Breath is taken to the front and during every arm
and close to the surface of the water. cycle; breath is taken as the arms pull in towards the body and
• Legs and feet: Simultaneous and symmetrical action; from the shoulders and head are relatively high in the water; breath is
stretched position knees bend and draw heels to the seat; knees taken before the legs kick back to the stretched position.
remain behind the line of the hips; feet turn outwards with the • Timing: From the front stretched position the arms pull, during
instep facing backwards; feet kick out, back and slightly down- which the breath is taken, followed by the kick; as the legs kick
wards in a circular movement, finishing with legs straight and backwards the arms stretch forwards and return to the extended
together. position; timing is described as pull, breathe, kick, glide.
84

--- Page 97 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
OUtCOme 9.2
Perform a basic butterfly with control.
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Pushing and gliding 1. Swimmers practice pushing and gliding on the Look for controlled, horizontal body position. KS2 PE 1a/1b
front with the arms at the sides.
2. Repeat with the arms extended and then on the
back with the arms by the sides.
Undulation on the back 1. Swimmers push and glide on the back with the • Encourage swimmers to aim for a smooth, rhyth- KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms at the sides. mic, undulating action.
2. Keeping the legs together and starting at the hips, • Encourage movement from the hips with only a
they move the legs up and down. slight bend at the knee.
• Encourage swimmers to keep the feet together as if
contained within one sock.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/9.2a1/452233/JRCS/R3 E5289/Lawton/9.2a2/452234/JRCS/R3-ke
85

--- Page 98 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Undulation on the front 1. Swimmers push and glide on the front with the • Encourage whole-body movement starting at the KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms at the sides and the face in the water. Keep- head and moving through the body to the toes.
ing the legs together and starting at the hips, Hips rise and fall in the water.
they move the legs up and down (see first row of • Tell swimmers to wiggle like a worm, with the head
illustrations). They stand when a breath is required, leading the movement.
then repeat the movement. • Encourage them to take a breath on return to the
2. Swimmers repeat the motion, this time going from surface and then dive down again.
the surface, under the water and back to the sur-
face.
3. Swimmers perform an undulating action with the
arms fully extended, first at the surface and then
underwater (see second row of illustrations).
E5289/Lawton/9.2b1/452235/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/9.2b2/452236/JRCS/R2-alw
86
E5289/Lawton/9.2c1/452237/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.2c2/452238/JRCS/R2

--- Page 99 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Introducing the arm 1. Swimmers repeat the undulating movement on the • This helps swimmers to feel the coordination of the KS2 PE 1a/1b
action on the back back with the arms starting at the sides (see previ- arms and the legs.
ous activity). • Gradually reduce the pause between the arm
2. They make four whole-body undulating move- actions so that the combined arm and whole-body
ments, then the arms travel over the water to enter movements become continuous.
in a fully stretched position.
3. They pull underwater through to the hips.
4. They kick with the arms at the sides and then
repeat.
Introducing the arm 1. Swimmers stand in the water, leaning forwards • From the entry position the hands press slightly KS2 PE 1a/1b
action on the front with the arms stretched out in front and just below outwards, then pull in and under the body through
the surface. They pull through to the hips, followed towards the hips.
by a simultaneous over-the-water circling action to • The hands and arms describe a keyhole shape.
enter the water in front of the shoulders. • Breathing occurs as the hands and arms push
2. Repeat number 1, but with swimmers walking and through towards the hips, and the shoulders are
using the arm action to pull the body forwards. high.
3. Combine the action with breathing to the front.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/9.2d1/452239/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.2d2/453585/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.2d3/453586/JRCS/R2
87

--- Page 100 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Introducing the full stroke 1. Swimmers push and glide on the front with the • Emphasise a whole-body undulating action. KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms fully extended. • Encourage movement from the surface, underwa-
2. They begin underwater at a depth of about 1/2 ter and back to the surface.
metre, then complete four whole-body undulating • Breath is taken as head breaks the surface and
movements. hands and arms start to pull.
3. On the fourth movement, they pull with the arms
and come to the surface, then take a breath and
bring the arms over the water and then dive back
under the water again and repeat.
4. Swimmers gradually reduce the number of kicks
for every arm cycle until they do two kicks for each
complete arm cycle.
E5289/Lawton/9.2e1/452240/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.2e2/452241/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.2e3/452242/JRCS/R2
Understanding the stroke 1. Arrange learners in pairs for reciprocal teaching. Ask learners to focus on the undulating action of the KS2 PE 3a/3b
2. Ask each learner to observe the swimmer swim- body along with the action of the arms and legs.
ming the stroke and to make suggestions for
improvement.
88 E5289/Lawton/9.2e4/452243/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.2e5/452244/JRCS/R2

--- Page 101 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
What to Look For: Technical Aspects • Arms: Simultaneous circling action; hands enter the water in
At this stage, the technical aspects should be kept to a minimum. How- front of the shoulders followed by slight outwards movement, and
ever, it is important to have a mental picture of what the stroke should then hands move in and under the body and push through to the
look like. The main points are as follows: hips; arms swing low over the water back to the entry position.
• Body: On the front and close to the water surface; position chang- • Breathing: Breath is taken to the front as the hands and arms
ing throughout as a result of the whole-body undulating action; push through to the hips; aim for one breath every two arm cycles.
head, shoulders and hips move up and down.
• Timing: Two kicks for every arm cycle; kick as the arms enter
• Legs and feet: Both legs together throughout; whole-body move- the water and then as they leave the water for the recovery; kick,
ment travels down through the hips to the legs and feet; toes are pull, kick and recover.
pointed.
89

--- Page 102 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 9.3
Be able to perform a number of additional aquatic skills appropriate to this stage of development.
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Treading water 1. Holding a float under each arm or woggle, swim- • Treading water is an important skill for swimmers to KS2 PE 1a/1b
mers lift the legs from the pool floor into vertical learn before moving out of their depth. Initial prac-
position and hold the position. tices should be completed in chest- to shoulder-
2. Still with floats or a woggle, swimmers lift the legs depth water.
from the pool floor and experiment with different • Encourage swimmers to keep the shoulders level
kicking actions: breaststroke; egg beater (an alter- with the surface of the water.
nating breaststroke action; see left illustration) or • Gradually reduce the amount of pressure on the
cycling (as in pedalling a bicycle; see right illustra- floats.
tion).
3. Repeat, using one float held with both hands. • Use a sculling action to help maintain a stable posi-
4. Without a float, swimmers stretch the arms out in tion.
front, under the surface of the water, and they per- • Set challenges based on increasing the time tread-
form a sculling action combined with the leg action. ing water.
5. Before swimmers move to being out of their depth
unaided, they practise treading water whilst hold-
ing a float in one hand and holding the side of the
pool with the other. Remaining close to the side,
they remove the hand from the side and use a
sculling action. Remaining close to the side, with-
out a float, they tread water, sculling with both
hands. Swimmers remain close to the wall until
they are confident and competent.
90
E5289/Lawton/9.3a1/452245/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/9.3a2/452246/JRCS/R1

--- Page 103 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Front somersault in the 1. From a standing position, swimmers push gently • Encourage a tight tucked position throughout with KS2 PE 1a/1b
water from the pool floor and perform a tucked forwards chin towards the chest
somersault. • Encourage swimmers to use the hands and arms to
2. Progress to a front somersault from the push and assist with rotation.
glide. • Finish in fully stretched position on the surface of
the water.
E5289/Lawton/9.3b1/452248/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.3b2/452249/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.3b3/452250/JRCS/R1
E5289/Lawton/9.3b4/452251/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.3b5/452252/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.3b6/452253/JRCS/R2
(continued)
91
E5289/Lawton/9.3b1/452248/JRCS/R1

--- Page 104 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Head-first surface dive 1. Swimmers practise handstand (see unit 8). • The minimum depth of water required is the full KS2 PE 1a/1b
2. They swim breaststroke with the head up and then stretch height of the swimmer.
surface dive. • When starting the surface dive, encourage swim-
mers to press the hands and arms downwards and
pull through to the thigh; the head and shoulders
travel downwards and forwards.
• Encourage swimmers to lift the legs above the
body as in a handstand position.
• Once underwater, commence swimming to go
deeper or forwards.
Feet-first surface dive 1. In chest- or shoulder-depth water with the feet on • Encourage swimmers to keep the arms stretched KS2 PE 1a/1b
the bottom of the pool, swimmers jump up, raise above the head and together to force the body
the arms above the head and sink and sit on pool downwards.
floor. • Aim for a streamlined position.
2. In deep water (minimum full stretch height of the • From treading water, encourage the swimmers to
swimmer) swimmers start with treading water, then kick down hard with the legs and press down with
complete a feet-first surface dive, tuck forwards the hands to lift the shoulders out of the water
and swim away. before throwing the arms upwards above the head
to show streamlined position from fingers to toes.
• Encourage swimmers to allow the body to sink to
the desired depth, then tuck and swim forwards.
92

--- Page 105 Text ---
Developing Breaststroke and Butterfly
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Back somersault 1. Swimmers float on the back with the arms by the • Encourage deep breath before attempting the KS2 PE 1a/1b
sides. somersault.
2. Swimmers tuck the knees towards the chest into a • Use assistance of a partner in the water if required.
tight ball.
3. Swimmers drop the head backwards whilst main-
taining a tucked position.
4. Swimmers use a sculling action with the hands to
push water towards the feet.
5. Swimmers rotate backwards through 180 degrees.
E5289/Lawton/9.3c1/452260/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.3c2/452261/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/9.3c3/452262/JRCS/R1
E5289/Lawton/9.3c4/452263/JRCS/R1
93

--- Page 106 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
Unit 9 Checklist
√
Swim full-stroke breaststroke showing a smooth and controlled
Before moving to unit 10, the learners should be able to complete the
coordination of the arms and legs for a minimum of 10 metres.
activities in the following checklist. Unit 10 builds on the outcomes
achieved in this unit; ideally, all learners should be able to achieve these Swim full-stroke butterfly showing a smooth and controlled coor-
outcomes before moving on. In circumstances where this is not the case, dination of the arms and legs for a minimum of 10 metres.
you will need to consider whether it is possible to establish a number of
Perform a head-first surface dive in water of at least full stretch
groups appropriate to different stages of development. This may have
height to show complete submersion.
implications for staffing. Where it is not possible, you should aim to
differentiate subsequent tasks to ensure that they are appropriate to the Perform a feet-first surface dive in water of at least full stretch
different abilities within a single group. height to show complete submersion.
Tread water for a minimum of 30 seconds.
Complete the following circuit: Enter the water with a jumping
entry; swim 10 metres and tread water for 30 seconds; complete
a feet-first surface dive and swim underwater for a minimum of 3
metres; surface, swim a further 10 metres, complete a head-first
surface dive and swim underwater for a minimum of 3 metres; sur-
face, and swim to the nearest point of exit and climb out unaided.
94

--- Page 107 Text ---
Unit
10
Further Development of
the Four major Strokes
and aquatic Skills
OUtCOmeS
At the end of this unit, learners should have met the following outcomes:
10.1: Swim longer distances on a minimum of two of the four major
strokes showing good control. (In this unit, the outcome is
broken down into 10.1a, 10.1b, 10.1c and 10.1d to cover the
four strokes.)
10.2: Be able to combine strokes and skills to perform aquatic circuits.
95

--- OCR from Page 107 Image 1 ---
W

--- Page 108 Text ---
H
aving completed all previous units, the learners will be confident Linking to the national Curriculum
in the water and will have developed a range of aquatic skills and a
requirements
degree of competence in the four major strokes. However, a comprehen-
sive swimming programme embraces a wide range of skills and activi-
ties. Developing basic aquatic skills is an integral part of units 3 through During this unit the learners are introduced to the following aspects of
9, but unit 10 identifies practices that can be used to further develop the National Curriculum (NC). The NC references are detailed in How
the four major strokes whilst also combining strokes and skills into to Use This Book.
sequences. This unit helps to ensure that the swimmers become more
skilled performers, and it adds more variety to the aquatics programme.
NC reference
Drills marked with a * can be performed with fins (flippers), which
can be particularly helpful in the early stages and when refining the PE knowledge, skills and understanding
drill. When using fins, ensure that swimmers have plenty of space to
Exploring how to choose and apply skills and actions in KS1 2a
avoid contact with other swimmers.
sequence and in combination
The drills detailed in this unit focus on various aspects of the stroke
(e.g. body position, arm action) with the aim that improvements in Consolidating their existing skills and gaining new ones KS2 1a
specific aspects of the stroke will enhance the overall performance of
Performing actions and skills with more consistent control KS2 1b
the complete stroke.
and quality
Where recovery is referred to, this relates to the aspect of the stroke
in front crawl, backstroke and butterfly where the arms travel over the
water and back to the start position. In breaststroke the recovery is
where the arms push forwards to the glide position.
96

--- Page 109 Text ---
Further Development of the Four Major Strokes and Aquatic Skills
OUtCOme 10.1a
Swim backstroke over longer distances showing good control.
Equipment and Resources
Lane ropes; fins (flippers), if needed
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Shoulder roll Body position 1. Swimmers kick on the back with the arms by • Encourage swimmers to maintain the shoul- KS2 PE 1a/1b
drill* the sides, rotate to the side to lift one shoul- der above the surface for a number of kicks.
der above the surface, return to back kicking • Emphasise a continuous kick and steady head
position and then repeat with other shoulder. throughout with eyes looking towards the
2. Swimmers rotate the shoulders alternately ceiling.
without moving to the back kicking position
in between.
Single arm with Body position 1. Swimmers kick with one arm extended and • Encourage swimmers to keep the shoulder on KS2 PE 1a/1b
rotation* one at the side. the nonpulling arm above the surface.
2. Swimmers pull the extended arm and recover • Emphasise keeping the head still even when
the other arm to the extended position. rotating.
3. Swimmers change arm positions every six
kicks.
(continued)
E5289/Lawton/10.1a/452264/JRCS/R2
97

--- Page 110 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Rope drill Arm action 1. Swimmers swim on the back with a shoulder Encourage swimmers to keep the shoulder on KS2 PE 1a/1b
close to a lane rope. the nonpulling arm above the surface.
2. Grabbing the lane rope, they gently pull the
body along the rope with the hand moving
towards the thigh.
3. The nonpulling arm moves over the water
and back to the start position.
4. Repeat along the length of the rope and then
with the other arm.**
Lane rope
Kicking in Leg action Swimmers push and glide on the back with the • Ensure that a horizontal position is main- KS2 PE 1a/1b
extended arms fully extended above the head and thumbs tained with the hips close to the surface; look
position* locked together. for small splash behind.
• Emphasise the need to keep the face clear of
the water to ensure regular breathing.
E5289/Lawton/10.1b/452265/JRCS/R2
98
E5289/Lawton/10.1c/452266/JRCS/R1

--- Page 111 Text ---
Further Development of the Four Major Strokes and Aquatic Skills
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Periscope drill* Leg action 1. Swimmers push and glide on the back with • This is a demanding drill requiring a strong KS2 PE 1a/1b
the arms at the sides. leg action.
2. They lift both arms out of the water to a • Ensure that swimmers can maintain a hori-
45-degree angle. zontal position with the arms at 45 degrees
3. The angle gradually increases until the arms before progressing.
are pointing towards the ceiling (90 degrees). • Initially complete over short distances.
*These drills can be performed with fins (flippers).
**Note: Unit 8 made reference to the more advanced bent-arm pull in backstroke. This drill can be used specifically to help develop this action. See the next section for a technical description.
Things to Look For: Technical Aspects lowed in the water with the eyes looking upwards towards the
This relates specifically to the development of the bent-arm action that ceiling; increased shoulder roll and upper body rotation enable
was mentioned in unit 8. The difference between the arm action for the more power to be applied in the pull.
learner and the action used by the competent swimmer is greater in
• Legs and feet: Horizontal, close to the surface, knees under the
backstroke than in the other strokes, and therefore it warrants specific
water with feet and toes pointed; steady, continuous, alternat-
consiEd5e2r8a9t/iLoanw.to nT/h7.2ea 2b/4e5n3t0-2a7r/mJR CaSc/tRi3o-nal won backstroE5k2e8 9i/sL auwstoend/1 0to.1 de2n/4s5u2r2e68 /JRCS/R4-ke E5289/Lawton/10.1d3/453032/JRCS/R3-alw
ing action initiated at the hips with a slight bend at the knee;
that the swimmer achieves maximum propulsion. Other aspects of the
small splash behind; powerful kick provides more stability for
stroke remain largely unchanged, although greater rotation of the body
the lower body.
occurs from side to side. The rotation drills identified in the previous
• Arms: Controlled, alternating, circular action, over the water
section complement the bent-arm action.
with hand entering overhead at full stretch with the little finger
• Body: Almost horizontal, stretched and streamlined; chest is at entering the water first and palm facing outwards; the hand
the surface with hips slightly submerged; back of the head is pil- moves downwards to the catch position; the hand continues
99

--- Page 112 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
to move slightly downwards and the elbow bends to about 90 from the side the hand would follow a pattern similar to an
degrees, at which point the hand will be in line with the shoul- elongated S shape.
der with the palm of the hand facing the feet. The hand then
• Breathing: Regular, controlled breathing.
sweeps upwards towards the surface of the water and then
slightly downwards as it pushes through to the hips, increas- • Timing: Smooth, continuous movement with kicking, pulling
ing the power and distance obtained from each stroke. Looking and breathing coordinated and controlled.
OUtCOme 10.1B
Swim front crawl over longer distances showing good control.
Equipment and Resources
Floats; fins (flippers), if needed
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Zip-up recovery Arm action—high 1. Swimmers begin on the front with one arm Encourage swimmers to keep the thumb in con- KS2 PE 1a/1b
drill* elbow recovery extended holding a float; the other arm is by tact with the body up to the armpit.
the side.
2. The arm by the side begins the recovery by
drawing the thumb along the body until it
reaches the armpit and then forward to enter
the water between the head and the shoul-
der with the arm almost fully extended.
3. Repeat with other arm.
100
E5289/Lawton/10.2a1/452269/JRCS/R2-alw E5289/Lawton/10.2a2/452270/JRCS/R2-alw

--- Page 113 Text ---
Further Development of the Four Major Strokes and Aquatic Skills
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Salute recovery Arm action—high 1. Swimmers begin on the front with one arm • This drill is similar to the previous one; it rein- KS2 PE 1a/1b
drill* elbow recovery extended and holding a float; the other arm forces the need for a high elbow position.
is by the side. • Ensure that the drill is slow and controlled.
2. The arm by the side begins the recovery. As
the arm recovers over the water, swimmers
touch the shoulder and forehead with the
thumb; the hand moves forward to the entry
position between the head and the shoulder
with the arm almost fully extended.
Pause drill* Leg action 1. Swimmers push and glide with one arm • Encourage the pupils to pause in the KS2 PE 1a/1b
extended and one arm by the side, the face in extended position whilst the legs kick.
the water and eyes looking at the bottom of • Ensure that the drill is slow and smooth.
the pool.
2. They count six leg kicks and then pull with
the extended arm and recover with the arm
held at the side; incorporate breathing before
returning the face in the water with eyes
looking towards the bottom of the pool.
3. Swimmers hold the new position for six kicks
and repeat. The kick is strong throughout.
Power kicking* Leg action 1. Swimmers push and glide on the front with • Ensure that thumbs remain locked together. KS2 PE 1a/1b
the arms fully extended and thumbs locked • The kick should be vigorous and continuous.
together.
2. Keeping face in the water, they kick at maxi-
mum speed over short distances.
3. Repeat, but with the head out of the water • Encourage the swimmers to keep the chin on
throughout. Aim to cover 25 metres, then rest surface throughout.
and repeat.
Head-up front Leg and arm 1. Swimmers perform front crawl full-stroke • Ask swimmers to observe the entry position KS2 PE 1a/1b
crawl* action with the head up. of the hands; aim for close to the centre line.
2. The eyes are looking forward throughout. • Emphasise strong leg action to help over-
come the high head position.
*These drills can be performed with fins (flippers).
101

--- Page 114 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
OUtCOme 10.1C
Swim breaststroke over longer distances showing good control.
Equipment and Resources
Pull buoy; fins (flippers), if needed
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Inverted breast- Leg action 1. Swimmers push and glide on the back with • Encourage a good streamlined position KS2 PE 1a/1b
stroke leg action the arms fully extended above the head and during the push and glide and ask swimmers
thumbs locked together. to keep the knees at or below the surface
2. From the extended position, perform the when kicking.
breaststroke leg action. • Following the breaststroke kick, hold the
extended floating position for 3 seconds
before kicking again.
Kick hands drill Leg action 1. Swimmers push off on the front with the • Encourage a continuous leg action. KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms by the sides, fingers pointing towards • Emphasise a quick breath before the legs kick
the toes. backwards.
2. Heels are brought up to touch the hands
before kicking outwards and back.
3. Swimmers breathe as the heels are drawn
towards the hands.
4. The face is in the water as the legs drive back-
wards.
Three kicks to Leg action and 1. Arms are held out in front, thumbs locked • Emphasise a powerful arm pull between each KS2 PE 1a/1b
one pull full stroke together. three kicks.
2. Swimmers complete three kicks followed by • Reduce to two and then one kick between
one arm pull. arm pulls, but emphasise a long stretch
between kicks.
102
E5289/Lawton/10.3a/452271/JRCS/R2

--- Page 115 Text ---
Further Development of the Four Major Strokes and Aquatic Skills
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Arms only* Arm action 1. Swimmers position a pull buoy between the • Emphasise short, circular arm action. KS2 PE 1a/1b
knees. • Shoulders should be high in the water as the
2. They use the arm action only. hands sweep in towards the chest.
3. Swimmers fully submerge the head as the
hands push forward.
*These drills can be performed with fins (flippers).
OUtCOme 10.1D
Swim butterfly over longer distances showing good control.
Equipment and Resources
Fins (flippers)
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Dive drill* Undulating action 1. Swimmers push and glide with the arms by • Emphasise the dive, kick, breathe and dive KS2 PE 1a/1b
the sides. sequence.
2. They perform an undulating action going • Encourage swimmers to look down whilst
underwater, kicking four times. kicking underwater.
3. On the fourth kick they aim to come back to • Emphasise bringing the hips to the surface as
the surface to breathe. the pupils start to dive underwater.
4. As soon as the head breaks the surface, swim-
mers breathe quickly and then tuck the chin
so that the forehead enters the water first. In
the context of butterfly, this is referred to as
the dive phase.
Dive drill with Undulating action This is the same as the dive drill but with • Encourage swimmers to look down when KS2 PE 1a/1b
arms extended both arms extended and with thumbs locked kicking underwater.
together. • Emphasise the dive, kick, breathe and dive
sequence.
(continued)
103

--- Page 116 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and Aspect of stroke
progression developed Description Teaching tips NC reference
Single-arm Arm action 1. Swimmers push and glide with one arm • Emphasise the pull, breathe, dive, kick KS2 PE 1a/1b
butterfly* extended and one arm at the side. sequence.
2. They perform a whole body undulating • Ensure that hips are high just before the dive
action combined with the single-arm but- stage.
terfly.
3. They initially breathe to the side, then to the
front.
E5289/Lawton/10.4a1/452272/JRCS/R1 E5289/Lawton/10.4a2/452273/JRCS/R2 E5289/Lawton/10.4a3/452274/JRCS/R3-ke
Combination Full stroke 1. This is a combination of the previous drills. Encourage swimmers to breathe every two arm KS2 PE 1a/1b
drill* 2. Swimmers perform two strokes with one arm, cycles.
two with the other and finally two strokes
with both arms; then repeat the cycle.
Power kicking* Leg action 1. Swimmers push and glide with the arms Emphasise whole-body movement and chang- KS2 PE 1a/1b
extended in front and thumbs locked. ing position of the hips from low to high.
2. They kick at maximum speed whilst breath-
ing every six kicks.
E5289/Lawton/10.4a4/452275/JRCS/R1
*These drills can be performed with fins (flippers).
104

--- Page 117 Text ---
Further Development of the Four Major Strokes and Aquatic Skills
OUtCOme 10.2
Be able to combine strokes and skills to perform aquatic circuits.
Aquatic circuits bring together previously learned strokes and skills and can be as varied as the imagination allows. The objective is to provide a
range of challenges that the learners normally complete whilst swimming in a circuit; you can also use these circuits as a means of increasing fit-
ness levels. Learners might be asked to perform as many circuits as possible in a set time. Similarly, you can use circuits for pair activities and as
team games; one person from each pair or team swims at a time. Two examples of aquatic circuits are provided next.
Circuits normally require access to deep water, so it is essential that swimmers are confident and competent being out of their depth.
Equipment and Resources
Hoops; ball; dive brick
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Circuit 1 1. Swimmers enter the water with a controlled jump • Revise individual skills before putting them KS1 PE 2a
(ensure appropriate water depth). together in the circuit. KS2 PE 1a/1b
2. They swim to a floating hoop positioned approxi- • If swimmers need a rest, encourage them to tread
mately 5 metres away and collect a ball. water.
3. They swim front crawl with the head up, propel the
ball to another floating hoop positioned 5 metres
away and place the ball in the hoop.
4. Swimmers tread water for 15 seconds.
5. They scull headfirst on the back for 10 metres and
perform a back somersault.
6. They scull feetfirst on the back for 10 metres.
7. They finish with a back float showing a star shape.
(continued)
105

--- Page 118 Text ---
Complete Guide to Primary Swimming
(continued)
Activity and progression Description Teaching tips NC reference
Circuit 2 1. Swimmers enter the water with a controlled jump • Ensure appropriate depths for each activity requir- KS1 PE 2a
(ensure appropriate water depth). ing submersion. KS2 PE 1a/1b
2. They swim to a designated spot and tread water for • If swimmers need a rest, encourage them to tread
15 seconds with one arm out of the water. water.
3. They scull headfirst on the back for approximately 5 • Have swimmers complete the circuit wearing light
metres, rotate onto the front, submerge and swim clothing for an additional challenge.
underwater for 5 metres.
4. Swimmers surface and float on the back for 5 sec-
onds, then swim to a designated spot and perform
a feet-first surface dive followed by a short swim
underwater.
5. They surface, swim to a designated spot and per-
form a head-first surface dive to collect a rubber
brick from the bottom of the pool.
6. Swimmers rotate onto the back and swim to the
side of the pool carrying the brick, then place the
object onto the poolside and climb out unaided.
Unit 10 Checklist Further Development
Unit 10 has no separate checklist. Learners should aim to complete all Learners who complete unit 10 with confidence will have demonstrated a
the skills identified in the two circuits with confidence. If you see any good range of skills and will be competent in the four recognised strokes.
swimmers struggling with any aspect, then you should provide oppor- For those learners who show a particular interest and enthusiasm for
tunities for additional specific skill practice. aquatic activity, you should take steps to ensure that opportunities are
provided within the school environment or within the local community
to enable continued participation and progression. This will contribute
towards developing a healthy lifestyle and may be the first step on the
ladder to success within the competitive arena. It could even be a step
towards producing a future Olympic champion.
106

--- Page 119 Text ---
Appendix
T
he information in this appendix in relation to pupil-to-teacher ratios are based on safety requirements and not the criteria for teaching. Best
and incentive awards is provided here to enable greater detail to practice may demand ratios less than those stated. Consider the ratios
be included. Both these aspects can have a significant effect upon the as part of the risk assessment. In certain circumstances, you might
quality and success of the swimming programme and therefore warrant make changes to the guidance provided. Factors such as the amount of
careful consideration. In addition, there is a wide range of equipment shallow water available at the pool and the behavioural characteristics
and teaching aids available that can help to enhance the teaching and of the group will influence group sizes.
learning of aquatic skills and swimming strokes. This appendix lists The ratios given are for swimmers in the water. Where the teacher
some of the equipment and teaching aids used in the activities of this is also responsible for swimmers on the poolside, then the ratios may
book and discusses some of their advantages and disadvantages. Also need to be smaller, or appropriate alternative action should be taken.
provided is a list of some of the organisations that may be able to provide Reducing the following ratios can significantly enhance the swimming
additional information and support. This list is by no means exhaustive. experience and improve the rate of progress.
Organisational demands sometimes make a teaching ratio of 20:1
Pupil-to-teacher ratios virtually impossible. In these circumstances, a qualified and skilled
teacher can adopt strategies to help with the management of the group.
The following information is extracted from guidelines provided by the For example, another person on the poolside who is competent to
Amateur Swimming Association (ASA), the national governing body for recognise and respond to a learner having difficulty may provide the
swimming in England. For the complete guidelines see Safe Supervision necessary supervision. In a school this could be an interested parent, a
for Teaching and Coaching Swimming, which is available to download teaching auxiliary or a sixth-form student training for a Sport Leaders
from www.swimming.org/britishswimming/. These guidelines are sub- or similar award. They must always work under the supervision of the
ject to periodic review, and the information provided here is correct at teacher and be absolutely clear on the nature and extent of their role.
the time of print. The extract provided here (see table) is most relevant Alternatively, you can teach learners to work in pairs, immediately
to swimming in primary schools. Some local authorities (LA) and local halving the number in the water at any one time. The teacher instructs
education authorities (LEA) have their own recommendations. Where the resting learners, who must be out of the water, to constantly observe
this is the case and where you are working within the LA or LEA, the their partners and to bring any concern to the immediate attention of
local guidance should be followed. the teacher. Teachers can adopt these measures only where they are
In the majority of cases encountered, pupil-to-teacher ratios should included in the pool’s normal operating procedures, and not where the
not exceed 20:1 and in some cases should be less than that. These ratios following exists:
107

--- Page 120 Text ---
Appendix
Ability Description Ratio
Nonswimmers and beginners Young children, normally of primary school age being introduced to swimming; if more than this 12:1
number is taught, other adults may help the teacher.
Improving swimmers Swimmers of similar ability who can swim at least 10 metres unaided on the front and back; it is 20:1
recommended that the lesson be confined to an area of the pool where swimmers are not out of
their depth.
Mixed-ability groups Swimmers with a range of abilities (from improving to competent swimmers), but where the 20:1
least able and least confident are working well within their depth; consider swimmers’ technique,
stamina and deep water experience.
Competent swimmers Those swimmers who can swim at least 25 metres competently and unaided on the front and 20:1
back and can tread water for 2 minutes.
Swimmers with disabilities Each situation must be considered independently; people with disabilities do not form a homog- 8:1 (with an appropriate
enous group. Ensure that you have sufficient helpers in the water to provide a 1:1 ratio for those number of helpers)
needing constant support and a sufficient number of other helpers to provide the degree of sup-
port demanded by the range of disabilities within the group. National organisations exist for spe-
cific disabilities; they can provide further guidance.
Adapted, by permission, from IOS, Safe supervision for teaching and coaching swimming (Loughborough, UK: Institute of Swimming).
• A wide variation in the swimming ability of the learners and record attainment. However, if you decide to use an award scheme,
you must ensure that the scheme is fit for purpose and that it comple-
• Language or learning difficulties
ments rather than dictates the learning programme. All too often, an
• A large water area (more than 250 square metres)
award scheme is selected and then it becomes the syllabus. Then the
• Deep water areas into which poorer swimmers could stray and teaching becomes geared to the awards rather than planned carefully to
be out of their depth meet the specific needs of the learners. The awards should be a natural
• Difficulty in seeing beneath the water surface caused by glare consequence of the teaching and learning. When considering the use
or reflection of an award scheme, use the following process:
For the complete guidelines, see Safe Supervision for Teaching and Coach- 1. Plan the teaching programme and the learning outcomes.
ing Swimming, which is available to download from www.swimming.
2. Select an award scheme. It is likely that specific awards will be most
org/britishswimming/.
appropriate rather than all the awards contained within a scheme.
3. Having used the awards, evaluate them in relation to how effec-
incentive awards tive they have been in measuring the learning outcomes and
recording attainment.
Success is a great motivator in all aspects of learning. In swimming, 4. If each award is considered to be appropriate, continue to use or
you can use various incentives to motivate learners, measure progress alternatively select another award or another scheme.
108

--- Page 121 Text ---
Appendix
Many awards schemes are available to use, some of which are national • Discs have a slight advantage over armbands because they do
awards that are available across a whole country, whilst others are not require inflation. Also, adding or removing a disc can make
awards developed locally. National awards have the advantage of helping it easier to adjust the amount of support provided.
to develop a common standard and are easily transferred if a learner
Buoyancy Suits and Swim Belts
moves from one area to another, but sometimes they can lack the flex-
ibility to synchronise with a specific teaching programme. Local awards • Same as armbands and discs, but they encourage a more hori-
are exactly that: an award achieved in one area may mean nothing if the zontal body position.
holder of the award moves to a different area, but the award scheme • They are helpful for children with a range of impairments.
may be designed to meet the specific requirements of the learning pro-
Floats
gramme for that area. Cost can also be an issue and may be a factor to
consider when deciding which particular awards to use. • They encourage a horizontal position.
Most children and adults like to receive some recognition that they • They allow early kicking skills to develop.
are making progress. Frequent feedback and praise from a teacher can
• They allow concentration on specific actions.
be helpful. However, an award can be particularly useful as a means of
• They are sometimes used as a buoyancy aid, which can be unsafe
recognising and rewarding specific milestones along the way to achiev-
because they are not designed to support a learner who may get
ing a greater goal.
into difficulties.
equipment and teaching aids Woggles (Noodles)
• They have many of the benefits of floats, but are more flexible
A large amount of equipment is available that assists learners in all in their use.
stages of their swimming development. The items described next are • They can provide support under the body.
particularly applicable to the activities detailed in this publication.
• They can be used for fun activities.
The use of buoyancy aids to assist those in the beginning stages of
learning to swim is subject to debate, but there is no doubt that many Pull Buoy
teachers and learners feel more confident with this type of support (see
• They are used to support the legs.
also unit 1 for additional comments on use of buoyancy aids). However,
• They are helpful when focusing on the arm action.
where buoyancy aids are used it is important to gradually reduce the
learners’ reliance on such aids to avoid overdependence.
Balls
The following lists include the benefits and disadvantages of some
• They encourage confidence in the water and game playing.
of the most popular swimming teaching aids.
Armbands and Discs Egg Flips
• They help develop early confidence and independence. • They encourage breathing through the mouth at the surface of
the water and also forced exhalation.
• Buoyancy can be reduced as confidence grows.
• Lessons can become more active. Sinking Objects (Bricks, Hoops, Novelties)
• All the limbs can be used and coordination improves. • They encourage submersion and opening the eyes underwater.
• Learners are often in a vertical position in the water when a • They can help develop other knowledge and skills such as colours,
horizontal position is usually desirable. counting or spelling.
109

--- Page 122 Text ---
Appendix
Hoops required to ensure that any aid or equipment used enhances the learn-
• They encourage early submersion and swimming underwater. ing process.
Pool Dividers Contacts
• They help to separate groups.
Amateur Swimming Association (National Governing Body for
Pace Clock or Stopwatch
Swimming); SportPark, Loughborough University, Leicestershire,
• They are useful for more able swimmers.
England LE11 3QF (www.swimming.org/britishswimming/)
Music Swimming Teachers Association; Anchor House, Birch Street, Walsall,
• It creates atmosphere that can stimulate or relax. West Midlands, England WS2 8HZ (www.sta.co.uk)
• It can make children listen. Royal Life Saving Society UK; River House, High Street, Broom, War-
wickshire, England B50 4HN (www.lifesavers.org.uk)
• It adds variety and fun.
Chartered Institute for the Management of Sport and Physical
These are just a few examples from an enormous range of equipment
Activity; SportPark Loughborough University, Leicestershire, Eng-
that is available to support learners at each stage of development. When
land LE11 3QF (www.cimspa.co.uk)
using aids, select them based on the specific needs of the learner and of
Association for Physical Education; Room 117, Bredon University
the activity. For example, in the early stages of teaching the front crawl
of Worcester, Henwick Grove Worcester, England WR2 6AJ (www.
leg action, many teachers ask the learners to use a float, even though it
afpe.org.uk)
often encourages them to kick with the head out of the water—some-
thing that teachers would want to discourage. Before using any aid, you Institute of Swimming; SportPark, Loughborough University, Leices-
must question whether an aid is actually required; in many instances, tershire, England LE11 3QF (www.swimming.org/ios)
the answer might be no, although this decision might be reversed if it Department for Education; Department for Education, Sanctuary
is subsequently observed that a learner is struggling to complete the Buildings, 20 Great Smith Street, London, England SW1P 3BT (www.
activity. As with all aspects of teaching swimming, careful thought is education.gov.uk)
About the Author
John Lawton is an ASA advanced swimming government to ensure that swimming became a compulsory aspect of
teacher and ASA coach. He has been teaching the primary school curriculum.
swimming since 1967 and has worked extensively Lawton served for 14 years as director of education for ASA, Eng-
training and supporting primary school teachers. land’s national governing body for the sport of swimming. Since 2006,
Lawton has authored and edited numerous ASA he has run his own sport education consultancy, and he is the editor of
teaching publications and written articles for ASA’s a publication aimed at teaching swimming to people with physical and
Swimming Times. He also was heavily involved learning disabilities.
with the Swim for Life campaign that lobbied the He earned an MSc degree from Loughborough University in physical
John Lawton education and sports science.
110

--- OCR from Page 123 Image 1 ---
Complete Guide to
PRIMARY SWIMMING

It's simple to teach swimming to pupils at key stages 1 and 2 when you use Complete
Guide to Primary Swimming. Written by ASA coach and teacher John Lawton, this
guide will help you safely teach swimming, even if you have limited experience.

This 10-unit programme demystifies the process of teaching swimming, offering a
clearly defined series of steps that will help pupils learn aquatic skills and the four strokes:
backstroke, front crawl, breaststroke and butterfly. The book contains

easy-to-follow activities that build sequentially from unit to unit;
links that highlight where the activities meet national curriculum requirements;

outcomes and checklists for each unit to ensure that pupils have acquired the
skills before moving on;

equipment lists and teaching tips that help you plan and run activities; and
simple illustrations that show correct techniques.

Complete Guide to Primary Swimming helps you teach your pupils to move, submerge
and float. You'|l also teach them about breathing, body position, gliding and developing
the strokes. Thanks to the expert guidance provided in this book, your pupils will develop
their swimming skills—and they'll have fun in the process.

te 13: 978-1-4504-0153-1
ISBN-10: 1-4504-0153-8

Human Kinetics gli78 14501401531