
--- Page 1 Text ---
learn to
swim

--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
—
learn to

SW 1TT)

--- Page 3 Text ---
ROB & KATHY M KAY
C
learn to
swim
Step-by-step water confidence and safety
skills for babies and young children
DKPUBLISHING, INC.

--- OCR from Page 3 Image 1 ---
\B & KATHY McKA

--- Page 4 Text ---
LONDON,NEW YORK,MUNICH,MELBOURNE,DELHI
Senior editor Salima Hirani
Senior USeditor Jennifer Williams
Senior art editor Hannah Moore
Project editor Claire Wedderburn-Maxwell
Project art editorTracy Timson
DTPdesigner Julian Dams
Production controller Shwe Zin Win
Managing editor Liz Coghill
Managing art editors Glenda Fisher,Emma Forge
Photographic art directorTracy Timson
Art director Carole Ash
Publishing managerAnna Davidson
Publishing director Corinne Roberts
First American Edition 2005
05 06 07 08 09 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Published in the United States in 2005 by
DKPublishing,Inc.,375 Hudson Street
New York,New York 10014
Copyright © 2005 Dorling Kindersley Limited,London
Text copyright © 2005 Rob and Kathy McKay
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions.No part of this publication may be reproduced,stored in
a retrieval system,or transmitted in any form or by any means,electronic,
mechanical,photocopying,recording,or otherwise,without the prior
written permission of the copyright owners.
Neither the authors nor the publisher can be held responsible for any
damage or injury resulting from baby swimming.
Catologing-in-publication data is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN 0-7566-0955-O
Reproduced by Colourscan,Singapore
Printed and bound by Star Standard,Singapore
See our complete product line at www.dk.com

--- OCR from Page 4 Image 1 ---
LONDON, NEW YORK, MUNICH, MELBOURNE, DELHI

Senior editor Salima Hirani — aa Vig

Senior US editor Jennifer Williams r . 7 >,

Senior art editor Hannah Moore
Project editor Claire Wedderburn-Maxwell
Project art editor Tracy Timson

DTP designer Julian Dams

Production controller Shwe Zin Win
Managing editor Liz Coghill | =
Managing art editors Glenda Fisher, Emma Fo
Photographic art director Tracy Timson
Art director Carole Ash
Publishing manager Anna Davidsot
Publishing director Corinne Roberts

First American Edition 2005 eae Ses
05 06 07 08.09 10987 6 Sa ayene a
Published in the United States in 2005 byl eal ih
DK Publishing, Inc., 375 Hudson Street — Bad Je 2 Pak:
New York, New York 10014 ‘s

Copyright © 2005 Dorling Kindersley Limited, Londo as

Text copyright © 2005 Rob and Kathy McKay

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in

a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior
written permission of the copyright owners.

Neither the authors nor the publisher can be held responsible for any
damage or injury resulting from baby swimming.

Catologing-in-publication data is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN 0-7566-0955-O

Reproduced by Colourscan, Singapore
Printed and bound by Star Standard, Singapore

See our complete product line at www.dk.com

--- Page 5 Text ---
CONTENTS
6 INTRODUCTION 60 The Breath-holding Cue 96 Guided Swim to the Wall
62 Face-to-Face Dip 98 Jump,Dip,and Swim
INTRODUCING
63 Jump from the Wall 100 Turning Around Underwater
8
BABY 64 First Held Underwater Swim
102 INTERMEDIATES:STAGETWO
SWIMMING 66 First Unaided Underwater
103 Stage Two Lesson Plan
Swim
104 Intermediate Swim to the
10 The Benefits of Baby 68 Balance
Wall
Swimming 69 Time to Go
105 Jump,Swim,and Turn Back
12 Positive Teaching Methods
70 BEGINNERS:STAGETWO to the Wall
18 How Children Develop
71 StageTwo Lesson Plan 106 Unaided Turn Underwater
20 Signs to Stop
72 Kicking Drills 108 The Safety Sequence
22 Choosing a Suitable Pool
73 Blowing Bubbles
24 Safety 110 INTERMEDIATES:STAGETHREE
74 Reaching for and Grabbing
26 What You Need—The Basics 111 Stage Three Lesson Plan
the Wall
28 Toys and Learning Aids 112 Coming Up for Air—
76 Learning to Wait
30 Questions and Answers Assisted
77 Monkey Walk
114 Coming Up for Air—
WATER 78 ADAPTATIONS FORTHREE- TO Equipment
34
CONFIDENCE
FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS 116 Front and Back Floating
79 Adapted Lesson Plan 118 Swimming on the Back
36 Teaching Beginners 80 Facial Submersions 120 180º Roll During a Swim
38 Bathtime Fun 82 First Short Swim 122 Diving for Rings
40 First Trip to the Pool 84 Standing Step Jump
44 Water Adjustment 85 Alligator Walk 124 Resources
46 Water Pouring Station 126 Index
48 Games and Songs SWIMMING 128 Acknowledgements
86
52 The Activity Circuit UNAIDED
54 BEGINNERS:STAGE ONE
88 Teaching Intermediates
55 Stage One Lesson Plan
56 Kicking 90 INTERMEDIATES:STAGE ONE
57 Above-water Pass 91 Stage One Lesson Plan
58 Cheek Dip 92 Rob’s Tai Chi Pass
59 Cheek Roll 94 Fin Fun

--- OCR from Page 5 Image 1 ---
CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

INTRODUCING
BABY
SWIMMING

The Benefits of Baby
Swimming

Positive Teaching Methods
How Children Develop

20 ‘Signs to Stop

22 Choosing a Suitable Pool

24 = Safety

26 What You Need—The Basics

28 — Toys and Learning Aids

30 Questions and Answers

34 WATER
CONFIDENCE

36 Teaching Beginners

38 Bathtime Fun

40 First Trip to the Pool

44 Water Adjustment

46 Water Pouring Station

48 Games and Songs

52 The Activity Circuit

54 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE

55 Stage One Lesson Plan

56 Kicking

57 Above-water Pass

58 Cheek Dip

59 Cheek Roll

60 The Breath-holding Cue

62 Face-to-Face Dip

63 Jump from the Wall

64 ‘First Held Underwater Swim

66 First Unaided Underwater
Swim

68 Balance

69 Time to Go

70 BEGINNERS: STAGE TWO

7\ Stage Two Lesson Plan

72 ~~ Kicking Drills

73 Blowing Bubbles

74 ~~ Reaching for and Grabbing
the Wall

76 Learning to Wait

77 Monkey Walk

78 ADAPTATIONS FOR THREE- TO
FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS

7? ~~ Adapted Lesson Plan

80 Facial Submersions

82 ‘First Short Swim

84 Standing Step Jump

85 = Alligator Walk

86 SWIMMING
UNAIDED

88 Teaching Intermediates

90 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE

a Stage One Lesson Plan

92 Rob's Tai Chi Pass

94

Fin Fun

96
98
100

102

Guided Swim to the Wall
Jump, Dip, and Swim
Turning Around Underwater

INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO

103
104

105

106
108

Ke)

Stage Two Lesson Plan
Intermediate Swim to the
Wall

Jump, Swim, and Turn Back
to the Wall

Unaided Turn Underwater
The Safety Sequence

INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE

Ill
112

ll4

llé
118
120
122

124
126
128

Stage Three Lesson Plan
Coming Up for Air—
Assisted

Coming Up for Air—
Equipment

Front and Back Floating
Swimming on the Back
180° Roll During a Swim
Diving for Rings

Resources
Index
Acknowledgements

--- Page 6 Text ---
INTRODUCTION
Learning to swim can be one of the most rewarding experiences of childhood.It is a
celebration,a rite of passage,and a gift of freedom.Reintroducing your baby to the water
at a young age makes perfect sense—after all,your little swimmer was surrounded by
water in the womb for nine months.
People around the world use water for relaxation,play,therapy,ritual,health,nourishment,
invigoration,and exercise.Water is an integral part of our human heritage,physical make-up,
and planet.In water we are weightless,free,caressed,and cleansed.Babies can enter this unique
natural element and its altered gravity in a non-stressful,harmonious manner.Your baby can
learn to swim months before he can walk,and it will be easier for him to propel himself to you
in the water,rather than learn to pull himself up,fight gravity,and walk toward you.None of us
remember learning to walk,and in much the same way a baby who learns to swim at an early
age,as part of a gradual,child-centered approach,won’t remember a time when he couldn’t
swim and claim water citizenship.
Who better to teach your baby to swim than the people he trusts the most? We believe
parents are a baby’s best teachers,on land and in the water,and have therefore adapted our
established swim-school program specifically for this book,so that we can pass on the wealth
of knowledge we have gained from our nurturing and stimulating child-friendly classes.Learn to
Swim is designed to help parents establish an optimal learning environment for children aged
six months to four years.Utilizing our combined 50 years of experience in teaching thousands
of babies and children to swim,we will guide you to successfully create a watery classroom
full of positive reinforcement,color,music,stimulation,laughter,and motivation.
Our commonsense approach places your child at the center of the learning.He will learn and
develop swimming skills through games,songs,humor,praise,and developmentally appropriate
skill activities.You will follow a child-paced,step-by-step learning progression especially designed
for very young swimmers.And although this book is for parents who are teaching their own
children to swim,we hope swimming teachers will also find it useful and integrate our gentle
approach to baby swimming into their programs.
Learning is a process,not a product—it should occur at the child’s pace,when he is open,
receptive,relaxed,and ready.We teach swimming—not thrashing—and that takes patience,
practice,and a great deal of time,and when you give your child that time and patience,you lay
a foundation of mutual respect and trust that you can build on in other areas of your lives.
Teaching your child to swim in this supportive and caring way is not just about helping him to

--- OCR from Page 6 Image 1 ---
INTRODUCTION

Learning to swim can be one of the most rewarding experiences of childhood. It is a
celebration, a rite of passage, and a gift of freedom. Reintroducing your baby to the water
at a young age makes perfect sense—after all, your little swimmer was surrounded by
water in the womb for nine months.

People around the world use water for relaxation, play, therapy, ritual, health, nourishment,
invigoration, and exercise. Water is an integral part of our human heritage, physical make-up,
and planet. In water we are weightless, free, caressed, and cleansed. Babies can enter this unique
natural element and its altered gravity in a non-stressful, harmonious manner. Your baby can
learn to swim months before he can walk, and it will be easier for him to propel himself to you
in the water, rather than learn to pull himself up, fight gravity, and walk toward you. None of us
remember learning to walk, and in much the same way a baby who learns to swim at an early
age, as part of a gradual, child-centered approach, won’t remember a time when he couldn't
swim and claim water citizenship.

Who better to teach your baby to swim than the people he trusts the most? We believe
parents are a baby’s best teachers, on land and in the water, and have therefore adapted our
established swim-school program specifically for this book, so that we can pass on the wealth
of knowledge we have gained from our nurturing and stimulating child-friendly classes. Learn to
Swim is designed to help parents establish an optimal learning environment for children aged
six months to four years. Utilizing our combined 50 years of experience in teaching thousands
of babies and children to swim, we will guide you to successfully create a watery classroom

full of positive reinforcement, color, music, stimulation, laughter, and motivation.

Our commonsense approach places your child at the center of the learning. He will learn and
develop swimming skills through games, songs, humor, praise, and developmentally appropriate
skill activities. You will follow a child-paced, step-by-step learning progression especially designed
for very young swimmers. And although this book is for parents who are teaching their own
children to swim, we hope swimming teachers will also find it useful and integrate our gentle
approach to baby swimming into their programs.

Learning is a process, not a product—it should occur at the child’s pace, when he is open,
receptive, relaxed, and ready. We teach swimming—not thrashing—and that takes patience,
practice, and a great deal of time, and when you give your child that time and patience, you lay
a foundation of mutual respect and trust that you can build on in other areas of your lives.
Teaching your child to swim in this supportive and caring way is not just about helping him to

--- Page 7 Text ---
learn water confidence and safety skills.It is also about developing a teaching style in relation
to the way your child learns,encouraging and supporting him rather than being demanding
and demeaning,and replacing the pressure to learn with the desire to learn.
Celebrate each small step along the way,and remember that there is no need to rush or
force your child to perform as there will be periods of skill assimilation and learning plateaus.
Read your baby’s body language and assess his level of readiness to determine the course of
each lesson.We want your child to enjoy this experience from his very first trip to the pool,in
the hope that he will continue to enjoy swimming for a lifetime.As you play with your baby
in the pool,you are not only teaching movement through the water,but fostering exploration,
curiosity,trust,joy,wonder,risk-taking,confidence,grace,and endurance.
In the first chapter of the book,we introduce all the essential basics:the philosophy of our
teaching;the many benefits of baby swimming,what you need to take to the pool,positive
child-friendly teaching methods,and comprehensive water-safety strategies.The second chapter,
Water Confidence,is divided into stages that are based on age.In this chapter,we take you
through the initial phases of water adjustment,how to teach your child to hold his breath for
submersion,then onward toward the exciting moment when your baby takes his first swim
between two people.Once your baby can comfortably perform all the age-appropriate skills in
this section,you will move on to the intermediate swimming skills,such as turning around
underwater,floating,and diving for rings,as shown in the third chapter,Swimming Unaided.
We hope this family experience is a remarkable one for both you and your child.Delight in the
giggles and splashes,the time you have to bond in the pool,and the excitement and pride your
child shows as he develops new skills.So grab your swimsuits and let’s go to the pool...

--- OCR from Page 7 Image 1 ---
learn water confidence and safety skills. It is also about developing a teaching style in relation
to the way your child learns, encouraging and supporting him rather than being demanding
and demeaning, and replacing the pressure to learn with the desire to learn.

Celebrate each small step along the way, and remember that there is no need to rush or

force your child to perform as there will be periods of skill assimilation and learning plateaus.
Read your baby’s body language and assess his level of readiness to determine the course of
each lesson. We want your child to enjoy this experience from his very first trip to the pool, in
the hope that he will continue to enjoy swimming for a lifetime. As you play with your baby
in the pool, you are not only teaching movement through the water, but fostering exploration,
curiosity, trust, joy, wonder, risk-taking, confidence, grace, and endurance.

In the first chapter of the book, we introduce all the essential basics: the philosophy of our
teaching; the many benefits of baby swimming, what you need to take to the pool, positive
child-friendly teaching methods, and comprehensive water-safety strategies. The second chapter,
Water Confidence, is divided into stages that are based on age. In this chapter, we take you
through the initial phases of water adjustment, how to teach your child to hold his breath for
submersion, then onward toward the exciting moment when your baby takes his first swim
between two people. Once your baby can comfortably perform all the age-appropriate skills in
this section, you will move on to the intermediate swimming skills, such as turning around
underwater, floating, and diving for rings, as shown in the third chapter, Swimming Unaided.

We hope this family experience is a remarkable one for both you and your child. Delight in the

giggles and splashes, the time you have to bond in the pool, and the excitement and pride your
child shows as he develops new skills. So grab your swimsuits and let’s go to the pool...

--- OCR from Page 7 Image 2 ---
PYF
E WT Ey a
ara,

--- Page 9 Text ---
introducing
b a b y
s w i m m i n g
Water, babies, laughter, and learning to swim… it’s an unbeatable
combination.When approached in a nurturing, child-friendly way,
baby swimming offers your child numerous benefits, including boundless
joy and increased self-esteem and confidence. It enhances your baby’s
physical and personal development, resulting in a happy, healthy, and
well-adjusted child. Our journey begins with an important first step—an
informed parent.The goal of this chapter is to help you become a
confident, active, and trusted learning partner for your child.

--- Page 10 Text ---
1100 RUINNTNRIONDGU HCEIANDG BABY SWIMMING
THE BENEFITS OF BABY SWIMMING
There is a wide range of benefits available to babies and children who are taught
to swim in a gentle,gradual,child-paced way.Researchers have documented some
of the measurable positive effects of baby swimming,and parents around the world
have witnessed first-hand the many enhancements to mental,physical,emotional,
developmental,and social well-being that result from teaching their children to swim.
EMOTIONALBENEFITS
Swimming allows babies to move independently STUDIES ON
much sooner than they are able to on dry land. BABY SWIMMING
Imagine the boost of confidence and self-esteem that
movement through the water brings your child as A study conducted by Professor Liselott Diem
she explores her new,watery environment.Every time from 1974 to 1976 at the German Sports
you catch your child after a jump or a short swim, College in Cologne,Germany,found that
she learns trust.When you praise her for each small children who learned to swim at an early age
demonstrated advanced development in:
achievement on the way to mastering a skill,you
build her self-esteem.Babies’faces glow after they (cid:2)motor skills
successfully accomplish a task—they look for approval (cid:2)reaction time (reflexes)
and validation,and parental acknowledgement of their
(cid:2)power of concentration (focus)
efforts fosters their personal self-acceptance and pride.
(cid:2)intelligence
Swimming can be very empowering for babies,since it
offers them a new sense of freedom. (cid:2)social behavior
(cid:2)social interaction
Parent-child bonding
(cid:2)self-confidence
Where else but in the water can you commune face-
(cid:2)independence
to-face,skin-to-skin with your baby for extended
periods of time in a warm and inviting natural element? (cid:2)coping with new and unfamiliar situations.
Teaching your baby to swim increases your bond with Overall,children were found to be more
her as you play together and move in unison,and as well-adjusted than their peers who had not
you exercise patience,encouragement,and kindness participated in early swimming programs,and the
toward her.You will learn about her growing increase in both self-esteem and independence
due to baby swimming were cited as contributory
personality,sense of humor,and how she approaches
factors.The study also concluded that children
new situations.As you teach her,you will become
who swam from an early age benefitted from
aware of her learning style and her changing needs
positive interaction and bonding with their parent.
and abilities.This knowledge will not only aid successful
baby swimming but will also help you establish positive
parenting methods that you can use outside the pool.

--- Page 11 Text ---
THE BENEFITS OF BABY SWIMMING 11
SOCIAL BENEFITS to their growing repertoire of land-based skills.Because
If you can gather a group of like-minded parents and both sides of the body are involved,and therefore both
teach your children together,they will reap the social lobes of the brain,swimming increases coordination,
benefits—they learn from their peers by observing and motor development,and balance.Parents also see better
mimicking them,and also enjoy their company.Children sleep patterns after swimming.
begin to look forward to interacting with each other,
learning to take turns,to share,and to try new skills. PERSONAL SAFETY
With time,practice,and developmental capability,
PHYSICAL BENEFITS children can acquire the necessary swimming safety
All the fitness benefits that swimming brings adults skills to aid them in the event of a water emergency.
—an increase in strength,muscle tone,endurance,and A calm child who feels at home in the water and who
lung capacity—are also enjoyed by children.For young has regularly practiced safety skills with her parent will
babies,movement through the water liberates them not panic,but will rather proactively implement the
from a comparatively static life,and allows them to techniques she has learned.Note,however,that no child
exercise muscles that would otherwise not yet be used. should ever be considered “drownproof,”and you should
For older babies,swimming is the natural complement always be vigilant when your child is in the water.

--- OCR from Page 11 Image 1 ---
THE BENEFITS OF BABY SWIMMING I

SOCIAL BENEFITS to their growing repertoire of land-based skills. Because
If you can gather a group of like-minded parents and both sides of the body are involved, and therefore both
teach your children together, they will reap the social lobes of the brain, swimming increases coordination,

benefits—they learn from their peers by observing and motor development, and balance. Parents also see better

--- Page 12 Text ---
12 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS
Being a proactive,positive parent directly helps to nurture a well-adjusted,happy child.
When teaching your baby at such a young age,you have the opportunity to build trust,
share joy,communicate by touch and words,and bond with your child as he experiences
new and varied stimuli.The impact you have on your child at this young age cannot be
overestimated,and baby swimming is a unique opportunity to develop and put good
teaching practices into action.
THE CHILD-CENTERED APPROACH PROGRESS AT YOUR CHILD’S PACE
We live in an era that has benefitted from research into Just as children learn to walk,talk,and read at different
the capabilities of babies.No longer seen simply as little ages,they also learn to swim at different rates.As a
lumps,babies regularly astound scientists with their parent,it is critical that you do not place any
innate abilities.We now know how even a very young accelerated expectations ahead of your child’s actual
baby can discern faces,language,and emotion,and how readiness to learn a skill.All children learn to kick when
activities and experiences affect his mental development. they swim—but some do it on the first day,while
Although babies develop many skills from an early others do it only after a great deal of time,motivation,
age,parents should not attempt to create a “super and practice.Kicking on the first day doesn’t make one
baby.”Children should not be pressured or pushed child better,smarter,or stronger than another child
to perform,but guided to develop their skills who learns later—it simply means they are different
at a rate they are comfortable with. and unique individuals.

--- OCR from Page 12 Image 1 ---
LOGIT BIAQLIN©S TY Alivil.

THE CHILD-CENTERED APPROACH
We live in an era that has benefitted from research into
the capabilities of babies. No longer seen simply as little
lumps, babies regularly astound scientists with their
innate abilities. We now know how even a very young
baby can discern faces, language, and emotion, and how
activities and experiences affect his mental development.
Although babies develop many skills from an early
age, parents should not attempt to create a “super
baby.” Children should not be pressured or pushed
to perform, but guided to develop their skills
at a rate they are comfortable with.

PROGRESS AT YOUR CHILD’S PACE

Just as children learn to walk, talk, and read at different
ages, they also learn to swim at different rates. As a
parent, it is critical that you do not place any
accelerated expectations ahead of your child’s actual
readiness to learn a skill. All children learn to kick when
they swim—but some do it on the first day, while
others do it only after a great deal of time, motivation,
and practice. Kicking on the first day doesn’t make one
child better, smarter, or stronger than another child
who learns later—it simply means they are different
and unique individuals.

--- Page 13 Text ---
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS 13
THE IMPORTANCE OF
BODY LANGUAGE
Even before your baby can speak,he is a very
capable interpreter of your body language,and
will pick up on the slightest nuances.Your facial
expressions,muscle tension,tone of voice,and
reactions will all convey clues to your child about
his environment and how he should act.It is
therefore vital that you are relaxed and confident
with him in the water,as he will pick up on your
cues,whether positive or negative.
(cid:2)A relaxed,gentle touch and upbeat,playful,or
calm tone conveys a sense of ease to your child.
(cid:2)Use positive signals such as smiles,hugs,high-
Don’t worry about how quickly your child learns a new
fives,applause,laughter,or a kiss to reassure your
technique—just focus on helping him acquire a skill a child and reinforce a positive atmosphere.
little bit at a time.Make the most of the process and
(cid:2)Don’t send mixed signals—for example,don’t
the time you are spending together doing an activity
force your child to carry out a maneuver and then
you both enjoy,and remember the most important
give him a hug or a kiss.Use encouragement
thing is to make your lessons fun and playful.
rather than coercion.
Comfort in the pool You should carefully watch and interpret your
child’s body language—especially if he is too
Both children and parents bring with them a host of
young to speak.This will help you assess his
previous water experiences—some positive and some
comfort level and whether he is happy with the
negative.Some babies have been in the bath or shower
skills or games that you are practicing.
with water pouring over their face from just a few days
old,others have seen their older brother or sister swim (cid:2)A relaxed,happy,smiling child is enjoying the
experience.Note that his muscles will feel soft,not
underwater,and still others are fearful of the water
tight or tense.
because of a water scare or a previous bad experience
with an aggressive swimming program.Some children are (cid:2)If your child is clinging to you,it means that he
shy and want to assess a new situation from a distance; is not ready and needs more time to adjust to the
new situation.Don’t rush him or pull him away
others show an inherent aversion to having water on
from you—give him the security he is seeking.
their faces,but some will bolt immediately into a new
environment without a care. (cid:2)Crying is your baby’s way of telling you that
Remember also,if you are the gregarious parent of something is wrong and signals a need to stop
what you are doing.Redirect your child’s attention
a reserved and cautious child,you will need to respect
with a toy or by playing a different game,and
the fact that you have your own individual differences,
assess what caused the crying.
and learn from your child what makes him secure,
comfortable,and happy in the pool.

--- OCR from Page 13 Image 1 ---
Don’t worry about how quickly your child learns a new

technique—just focus on helping him acquire a skill a
little bit at a time. Make the most of the process and

THE I
BOL

Even before yo
capable interpr
will pick up on
expressions, mt
reactions will a
his environmen
therefore vital 1
with him in the

cues, whether |

A relaxed, ge
calm tone conv
Use positive
fives, applause, |:

child and reinfo

--- Page 14 Text ---
14 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
FEAR VERSUSLOVE the pool,mimicking what she saw earlier.Use these “off”
Some parents and swimming programs see water as the days to focus on the skills that your child enjoys,relax
enemy—a lethal danger to be feared,and a threat to be the pace of your lesson,and sing and play together.
dealt with.These “drownproofing”or “survival”swimming
programs often rely on aggressive methods,such as YOUR ROLE IN THE POOL
forced back floating.Skills are goal-oriented and must be Being in the water with your child is vital as it creates an
acquired rapidly by the baby in order for her to save immediate sense of security.A parent provides familiarity
herself if she enters the water unexpectedly.A parent is and can progress through the lesson at the child’s pace.
generally not present in the water during the lessons in Is your child relaxed and ready to try something new,
case the child relies on her parent to help her. or is she tense,stressed,or frightened and in need
These aggressive methods are in complete opposition of more time to adjust? The parent’s role is one of
to the child-centered approach,which is based on love conscious and aware observer as well as instructor.
of the child,love of water,and love of learning.We How you present new material and skills to your child
believe that this positive focus,and the fun it fosters, will be as important as the skills themselves.As this is
leads to much more successful learning than a fearful a child-centered approach,always go at her pace,and
environment can produce.Water is seen as a wonderful remember that your tone of voice,mood,and muscle
medium for growth and development,and the parent is tension send strong messages (see box,p13).
always in the water,bonding with his or her child,
facilitating learning,and assisting with the gradual
acquisition of skills.This means that the parent knows COMPARING
exactly what their child can and cannot do in the water, TEACHING METHODS
how long she can hold her breath,and how competent
a swimmer she is.The parent also recognizes their own Aggressive swimming programs use pressure
responsibility to safeguard their baby and to implement and coercion to achieve rigid goals.The child-
a comprehensive water safety strategy (see pp24–25). centered approach is very different,and
progresses at the child’s pace.
COPINGWITHCRANKINESS
GOAL-DOMINATED CHILD-CENTERED
Everybody is allowed a bad day occasionally,and
PROGRAM PROGRAM
sometimes children will have a bad five minutes or
skill comes first child comes first
an entirely bad week.Often this crankiness may be
time-frame is rigid, time-frame is flexible
unrelated to swimming—teething is a common problem,
and there is pressure and depends on
as is a missed or interrupted nap,hunger,or a change
to perform child’s readiness
in schedule (for example if one parent is away).It is
force and coercion gentle guiding and
important for you to be sensitive to the physical energy
are used to teach encouragement help a
levels and mood of your child and to not push her.
survival skills child accomplish goals
Hopefully,just being in the water will help your child
feel better.If you are swimming with other children, teacher is dominant progress at child’s pace
your child will benefit from observing everyone else no-nonsense format fun,playful learning
swimming.Observation time for a child may mean she
will try a skill later in the bath or on her next trip to

--- OCR from Page 14 Image 1 ---
pool, mimicking what she saw earlier. Use these “off”
to focus on the skills that your child enjoys, relax
pace of your lesson, and sing and play together.

UR ROLE IN THE POOL

g in the water with your child is vital as it creates an
ediate sense of security. A parent provides familiarity
can progress through the lesson at the child’s pace.
yur child relaxed and ready to try something new,

; she tense, stressed, or frightened and in need

1ore time to adjust? The parent's role is one of
cious and aware observer as well as instructor.

/ YOU present new material and skills to your child
be as important as the skills themselves. As this is
ild-centered approach, always go at her pace, and
amber that your tone of voice, mood, and muscle
ion send strong messages (see box, p13).

COMPARING
TEACHING METHODS

Aggressive swimming programs use pressure

and coercion to achieve rigid goals. The child-
centered approach is very different, and

progresses at the child’s pace.

GOAL-DOMINATED
PROGRAM

CHILD-CENTERED
PROGRAM

skill comes first

child comes first

time-frame is rigid,
and there is pressure

to perform

time-frame is flexible

@

nd depends on

child’s readiness

force and coercion
are used to teach

survival skills

gentle guiding and

encouragement help a

child accomplish goals

teacher is dominant

progress at child’s pace

no-nonsense format

fun, playful learning

--- Page 15 Text ---
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS 15

--- OCR from Page 15 Image 1 ---
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS I5

a y =

ia
:
i =
E 1.
: ar
Z A

--- Page 16 Text ---
16 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
FOCUS ON THE MOMENT Being patient
Because your child’s swimming lessons may be his first Make sure that you are relaxed and having fun during
educational outing,they should be positive experiences your swimming lessons,enjoying the giggles and splashes
that lead to many other educational successes as he that naturally accompany learning.Be patient with your
grows up.It’s up to you to get into your child’s frame child if he hates jumping off the wall or putting his face
of mind:focus on the game,the adventure,the color, in the water—he is bound to surprise you in the end.
the fun,and the laughter.Remember that your child Don’t let your tone of voice or your words betray you
will be much more focused on the moment—on the and indicate to your child your disappointment or
simple delights and novel experiences—and shouldn’t frustration.Instead,try another tactic or switch to
be rushed.Try to recall how thrilling your first trip another skill.Often,simply time and exposure are
to a swimming pool was and what your child must be required before a new skill seems less intimidating,
excited by:the feel of water on his skin,the bright and begins to look like fun and worth trying.
toys,the sight of water all around him,and the other
people in the pool. Using humor
Somehow,silliness has become the universal unspoken
MAKING SWIMMINGLESSONSFUN language that all children understand.Whether you’re
Crying is not a prerequisite for learning to swim,so playing peekaboo with a baby or creating an elaborate
never let an ill-informed relative or teacher tell you that pirate fantasy with a four-year-old,these children know
this is the case.Add skills slowly when your child is ready, we’re doing something fun and want to be a part of it.
never pushing him beyond his abilities,and remember Use play and toys to your advantage—they are great
that forcing skills on children is contrary to every sound learning aids as well as good distractions after a child
learning theory.Your own swimming program should does something they are not sure of,like a first
resemble all the best land-based programs for the relevant submersion.The more involved your child is in the
age group and contain those elements that best suit early game,the less likely he is to realize that he is trying
education—games,toys,fun,and laughter. something new that might be daunting.
KEYS TO AN OPTIMAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT
To ensure that your child has the best possible (cid:2)Warm,clear water is essential for baby swimming.
environment in which to learn to swim,follow Babies do not have a fully developed thermal
these guidelines: regulatory system so the water needs to be warm.
(cid:2)The parent should always be in the water.This Good water quality also ensures health and safety.
provides instant security and familiarity and promotes (See Choosing a Suitable Pool,pp22–23)
trust and bonding (cid:2)Develop a positive learning environment.Create an
(cid:2)Have frequent lessons.Repetition and practice atmosphere that appeals to the senses by using water
encourage smooth,consistent learning that closely play activities,games,songs,and colorful toys (see Toys
resembles a baby’s natural learning pattern and Learning Aids,pp28–29).

--- Page 17 Text ---
POSITIVE TEACHING METHODS 17
Encouraging toddlers water’s not going to hurt you.”Always appeal to a
Once your baby begins evolving into a toddler,signs child’s sense of fun and humor—for example,dripping
of emerging independence may challenge your water on the face can be called a “fishy kiss.”Remember
parenting skills and require more patience both in the to always praise every achievement,however small.
pool and at home.During this developmental stage the If you want to stop your child from doing
operative word is “no,”and “no”may truly mean “no”or something,then don’t just say “no,”but use
it may mean “yes”or even “maybe.”It is important at another tactic.For example,if he is
this stage not to make the pool a battleground,as jumping before you finish the
pushing a child who is pushing you usually backfires. count,ask him to count aloud
Instead,increase the amount of play and slapstick in with you,then jump.
your routine,and use games,distractions,and rapidly
changing,entertaining lessons to keep this age group
motivated and interested.
Communicating with your child
Think about how you phrase
things,and always talk
about what you are going
to do in a positive
rather than a negative
way.For example,ask
your child to “Jump
and splash me and get
me all wet,”rather than
saying,“Jump to me—the
Imaginary playEncourage
older children to try new skills
through imaginary play.For
example,diving for a pirate’s
hidden treasure trove sounds
far more exciting than simply
diving for rings.

--- OCR from Page 17 Image 1 ---
uraging toddlers

e your baby begins evolving into a toddler, signs
nerging independence may challenge your

iting skills and require more patience both in the
and at home. During this developmental stage the
ative word is “no,” and “no” may truly mean “no” or
yy mean “yes” or even “maybe.” It is important at
stage not to make the pool a battleground, as

ing a child who is pushing you usually backfires.
ad, increase the amount of play and slapstick in
routine, and use games, distractions, and rapidly
sing, entertaining lessons to keep this age group
vated and interested.

imunicating with your child
k about how you phrase
ss, and always talk

t what you are going
9 in a positive

than a negative
For example, ask
child to “Jump
splash me and get

Il wet,’ rather than
¢, “Jump to me—the

ginary play Encourage
- children to try new skills
igh imaginary play. For
ple, diving for a pirate’s
sn treasure trove sounds
ore exciting than simply
g for rings.

water's not going to hurt you.” Always appeal to a
child’s sense of fun and humor—for example, dripping
water on the face can be called a “fishy kiss.” Remember
to always praise every achievement, however small.

If you want to stop your child from doing
something, then don’t just say “no,’ but use
another tactic. For example, if he is
jumping before you finish the
count, ask him to count aloud

with you, then jump.

--- Page 18 Text ---
18 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
HOW CHILDREN DEVELOP
Every child develops at her own pace,but there are common developmental stages that
all children pass through.The exercises in this book are set out according to these stages,
so your child will never be learning water skills that she is not yet ready to acquire.
Whether your child is a six-month-old baby who loves one.In general,parents of younger babies tend to be
the water and swims like a dolphin,or a three-year-old nervous,when taking their child swimming,but don’t
whose mood changes daily about whether she likes the worry—you will find that your baby is very durable,
water or not,you need to be aware of what your child and that both of you are very capable.
is physically capable of and the best way to teach her. Within this age group lies the golden opportunity
to quite easily become at home on,in,and under
BABIES FROM 6 TO 12MONTHS the water.The young baby is still close to the fluid
The majority of babies in this age group love the environment she left in the womb—she has no fears,
water—they enjoy their bath and happily make and is not yet claiming independence.Once babies are
the transition from tub to pool.They are content comfortably swimming at this young age,they will never
with water poured in small amounts over their heads know a time when they didn’t know how to swim.They
and faces,which makes the water adjustment phase will not be afraid of the water and can learn safety skills
easier and briefer than for older babies. sooner than children who start at an older age.
What to expect in the pool TODDLERS FROMONE TOTHREE YEARS
Babies up to nine months love to splash and wriggle in Sturdy legs,an evolving kick,increased coordination,
the water,and show the rapid whole body undulation and a sense of humor typifies this age group of
of the dolphin- or froglike reflex kick.Between six and swimmers.This broad age span includes beginning
12 months the reflex kick fades away and is replaced by walkers to running toddlers,non-verbal babblers to
gliding for a while,until a learned kick is acquired later. competent speakers,and easygoing one-year-olds to
Babies may stare a great deal,but as their age independence-testing three-year-olds.
increases you begin to see a more alert and focused Because of their interest in manipulating toys and
child.Learning the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61) objects,as well as the fact that they can understand
also shows parents the difference between a reflex games and observe actions and consequences,children
reaction and a skill that the child actually learns. of this age are prime participants for learning through
Younger babies also tend to be more sensitive to interactive games and songs.
water temperature.They can become chilly faster,tire
more quickly,and sleep much longer after swimming. What to expect in the pool
Because the age range is so large,so is temperament.
The benefits of swimming Starting swimming at 13 to 18 months means you’ll still
For nearly all babies in this age group,swimming will be in a primary period of receptivity to water,making
be the first educational experience out of the home it easier to learn how to swim—there will be less fear,
environment,and it is important to make it a positive more cooperation,and a love of water.From 19 months

--- Page 19 Text ---
HOW CHILDREN DEVELOP 19
to three years,growing independence,stubbornness, can show off her vigorous splashes,while another might
and fear may necessitate clever game playing,humor,and be a great bubble blower,and yet a third may happily
additional time for your child to learn new skills. put her face in the water.
As most children in this age range are becoming Children begin to focus more,follow simple
mobile,the early reflex kick is now replaced by a directions,and link several skills together.Imaginative
learned and voluntary kick. play also distinguishes this age group and helps a
frightened,hesitant child,as well as a boisterous one.
The benefits of swimming Try using a circus,pirate,or spaceship theme in your
Children of this age begin to be more aware of each lesson—whatever motivates and encourages your child.
other and will copy other children,so for beginner and Children in this age group also like to work for
intermediate swimmers this is a good time to start rewards.A simple high-five may do.Or let her collect
swimming with other children.Through playing games a pile of toys earned one at a time as a reward.Little
and using toys together in the pool,children develop steps,reinforced and repeated again and again,begin to
social skills such as sharing and communication. instill a pattern of a desired behavior.
CHILDRENFROMTHREE TO FOUR YEARS The benefits of swimming
These children are real characters and make swimming Part of gaining trust involves respecting a child who
lessons lively with their burgeoning personalities,highly tells you that she doesn’t want to put her face in the
verbal commentary,and vivid imaginations.They are fun water.Where you as a parent can help her transcend
to interact with,and have their own particular likes and that fear is by using play,games,and humor to help
dislikes as well as varying experiences with water. her accomplish a submersion in small,non-
threatening stages.You may encounter
What to expect in the pool stalling techniques,but be
With physical sturdiness and growing coordination this patient.Once they have
age group is very capable of swimming well.They can gone past the largest
produce a strong voluntary kick,and sit,climb,or stand hurdles,this age group
with little or no assistance.However,if they are just demonstrates great
starting to learn to swim at these ages,a good competency.
percentage of children will have fears.Some of
these fears may be pronounced and almost
paralyzing,others slight and easily calmed.
Watching a peer who already swims can
bolster confidence,and children like to
show their peers and siblings what they
can do.Peer learning is extremely
appealing at these ages,and if you can
gather a group of friends and their
parents then you will see the benefits as
the children copy and encourage each
other.If one child kicks well she

--- OCR from Page 19 Image 1 ---
I a a

and communication. instill a pattern of a desired behavior.

REE TO FOUR YEARS The benefits of swimming

‘acters and make swimming Part of gaining trust involves respecting a child who

‘geoning personalities, highly tells you that she doesn’t want to put her face in the

id imaginations. They are fun water. Where you as a parent can help her transcend

heir own particular likes and that fear is by using play, games, and humor to help

xperiences with water. her accomplish a submersion in small, non- :

threatening stages. You may encounter

Ye) | stalling techniques, but be .
d growing coordination this patient. Once they have
of swimming well. They can gone past the largest

' kick, and sit, climb, or stand hurdles, this age group

However, if they are just demonstrates great a
t these ages, a good competency.
have fears. Some of -

nced and almost
1 easily calmed.
eady swims can
Idren like to
ss what they
remely

1 if you can
ind their

ne benefits as
yUrage each

Il she

--- Page 20 Text ---
20 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
SIGNS TO STOP
Responding to your baby’s needs,health,security,and comfort have been part of your
job description since the day he was born.Now you need to take your keen nurturing
and observational skills to the pool where your parental instincts will help you gauge the
flow of instruction and,most importantly,when to slow down or stop.
A TEAR-FREE ZONE
Make your swimming lessons a “tear-free zone.”Often
people who have witnessed aggressive swimming lessons
are astonished at the laughter,water confidence,and
lack of tears at our school.
There are several ways to keep the mood lighthearted
and the learning stress-free,including stopping,going
more slowly,or more accurately matching your child’s
pace.You cannot do everything at once in baby
swimming,and trying to do so will only stress your
child and overwhelm him.Always speak calmly and
softly,and move gently—a rough tug,hard push,or
gruff,impatient tone will only lead to tears.
Remember the following points:
(cid:2)do not introduce any new skills until a child is ready
(cid:2)If you see signs of resistance or discomfort because
you’ve jumped ahead of your child’s readiness,stop.Go
back to the previous skill or portion of the skill and do
not move on until your child is ready.
(cid:2)Don’t do everything all at once.Instead,do a little
bit each lesson and gradually the skills will develop.
(cid:2)If you are stressed or frustrated,stop.Step back and
take a deep breath before starting afresh.
(cid:2)If your baby is uncomfortably cold,shivering,has
blue lips,or is tired or upset,stop immediately and exit
the pool.
(cid:2)Lessons should be happy,playful times together.There
is no one rushing or timing you,so go at your child’s
pace and relax.If things aren’t going smoothly,just play,
enjoy the water for the rest of the lesson,and start
again at the next session.

--- OCR from Page 20 Image 1 ---
SIGNS TO STOP

Responding to your baby’s needs, health, security, and comfort have been part «
job description since the day he was born. Now you need to take your keen nu
and observational skills to the pool where your parental instincts will help you

flow of instruction and, most importantly, when to slow down or stop.

A TEAR-FREE ZONE
Make your swimming lessons
people who have witnessed ag
are astonished at the laughter,
lack of tears at our school.
There are several ways to ke
and the learning stress-free, in
more slowly, or more accurate
pace. You cannot do everythin
swimming, and trying to do s
child and overwhelm him. Alw
softly, and move gently—a rot
sruff, impatient tone will only

Remember the following point’
do not introduce any new .
If you see signs of resistan¢
you've jumped ahead of your

back to the previous skill or 5
not move on until your child

Don’t do everything all at «
bit each lesson and gradually 1
If you are stressed or frust'
take a deep breath before star
If your baby is uncomforta
blue lips, or is tired or upset, |
the pool.

@Lessons should be happy, pl:
is no one rushing or timing y
pace and relax. If things aren’t
enjoy the water for the rest o

again at the next session.

--- Page 21 Text ---
SIGNS TO STOP 21
SIGNS NOT TO GO IN
THE “TERRIBLE TOOS”
There are some days when it is important to stop
before you even begin.If your child is physically ill,for
Often when parents are having problems
example has a bad cold,heavy congestion,a stomach
teaching their baby to swim it can be traced
virus with vomiting or diarrhea,a fever,an ear infection,
back to an adult’s “Terrible Toos”:expecting
conjunctivitis,or anything contagious or infectious,stay too much,too soon,too far,and too often.
at home and rest until he is better.Not only are you
Too much
potentially exposing others to illness if you swim,but in
Babies can easily become overwhelmed,for
some of these cases your child’s muscle strength,lung
example by having too much water poured over
capacity,and mood will be compromised by exercise the top of their heads,or when too much new
such as swimming.In other cases,your doctor will call a material is presented to a hesitant child.
temporary halt to lessons until a subsequent visit clears
Too soon
your baby to resume activities.Otherwise,use your
You should always be alert and aware of signs of
good judgement and do not take your child swimming
readiness in your baby before you attempt new
until he returns to his normal activity levels and health.
skills.His comfort,competence,and relaxed
confidence will indicate he is ready to try the next
WHENNOTTOSUBMERGE YOUR CHILD step.Attempting skills that are not age-appropriate
When first learning the cue for submersions (see will stress babies and result in a lack of trust,an
pp60–61),some babies may sputter,cough,or be a bit unwillingness to attempt previous skills,frustration,
surprised.Usually,their attention can be redirected with and tears.Progress sequentially through the book,
a toy or different activity.However,if after a couple of waiting to build up the skills as your child grows
and develops both physically and mentally.
times your child is uncomfortable or begins resisting the
cue and submersion by arching his back,stop.Go back Too far
to playing at the Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47) When swimming your child underwater,don’t stand
and practicing the Cheek Dip (see p58).Once the Cheek too far from your partner so your child does not
Dip has been slowly and successfully re-introduced,you have to swim a long way to reach him.Keep your
child’s trust by lifting him out of the water while he
can try the Cheek Roll (see p59).After a couple of
has air in his lungs and is comfortably holding his
weeks,as comfort returns,you can re-attempt the
breath.Lung capacity is gained slowly,not in leaps,
forward motion of the Breath-holding Cue (pp60–61).
and swallowing excess water will hurt your child.
How often to submerge your child Too often
Excessive water swallowing,choking,and gagging are Repetition is the key to reinforcing a new skill,
but know when to stop.Putting a new beginner
not part of this program,so limit the number of times
underwater too often when he is just learning
that you submerge your child each lesson and gradually
the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61) may mean
introduce submersions so that breath holding is learned
he tires and begins swallowing water.Asking an
over a period of lessons.If you feel your baby has
apprehensive three-year-old to put his face in too
swallowed a bit too much water,stop.Slow down and
often starts eroding trust.Practice skills,but move
return to the Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47)
on to a new task before overdoing any one skill.
before gradually re-attempting submersions.Remember,
never force your child to go underwater.

--- Page 22 Text ---
22 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
CHOOSING A SUITABLE POOL
Think of the care that you put into looking after your baby,and make sure that this
extends to choosing a suitable public pool in which to teach your child to swim.Take
your time and carefully check out the pools near where you live.The pool and changing
facilities must be clean,and the water clean,clear,and warm.
POINTS TO CONSIDER Size of pool
There are a number of important points you should Pools come in all shapes and sizes,but with a little
bear in mind (see also Questions andAnswers,pp32–33) creativity you can carve out your own niche and
before you select a pool in which to teach your child: adapt your lesson to any pool.If it is just you and your
baby,then you will need a minimum area of
(cid:2)the pool water should be warm and clean
8 x 8 feet (2.4 x 2.4 m);for a small group you need at
(cid:2)the deck,locker room,and shower areas should be least 15 x 15 feet (4.6 x 4.6 m).
well-maintained and safe
(cid:2)stroller access should be available with adequate
space on decking areas
(cid:2)decking should have good drainage so that it
is not slippery
(cid:2)the pool should be a comfortable depth for
your lessons (see opposite)
(cid:2)the pool water should be crystal clear
(cid:2)disinfectant levels,for example of chlorine,
must be sufficient to eliminate the risk of
infection but should not irritate your child
(cid:2)indoor pools should be adequately
ventilated so there are no overpowering
chemical smells
(cid:2)outdoor pools should have some shade
(cid:2)the lifeguards should be trained in
CPR and First Aid and should be helpful,
friendly,and informative
(cid:2)an emergency telephone should be close by
As well as the above,make sure that the
pool opening times are convenient,and that
there is safe parking and access to the pool.

--- OCR from Page 22 Image 1 ---
22 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING

CHOOSING A SUITABLE POOL

Think of the care that you put into looking after your baby, and make sure that this
extends to choosing a suitable public pool in which to teach your child to swim. Take
your time and carefully check out the pools near where you live. The pool and changing

facilities must be clean, and the water clean, clear, and warm.

POINTS TO CONSIDER Size of pool

There are a number of important points you should Pools come in all shapes and sizes, but with a little

bear in mind (see also Questions and Answers, pp32—33) creativity you can carve out your own niche and

before you select a pool in which to teach your child: adapt your lesson to any pool. If it is just you and your
baby, then you will need a minimum area of

ee Sco elise Suteille} ie Wztied elitabealeeta 8 x 8 feet (2.4 x 2.4 m); for a small group you need at

the deck, locker room, and shower areas should be least 15 x 15 feet (4.6 x 4.6 m).

well-maintained and safe

stroller access should be available with adequate
space on decking areas

decking should have good drainage so that it
is not slippery

the pool should be a comfortable depth for
your lessons (see opposite}

the pool water should be crystal clear
disinfectant levels, for example of chlorine,

must be sufficient to eliminate the risk of
infection but should not irritate your child

indoor pools should be adequately
ventilated so there are no overpowering
chemical smells

outdoor pools should have some shade

the lifeguards should be trained in
CPR and First Aid and should be helpful,
friendly, and informative

an emergency telephone should be close by

As well as the above, make sure that the
pool opening times are convenient, and that
there is safe parking and access to the pool.

--- Page 23 Text ---
CHOOSING A SUITABLE POOL 23
Checking the depth thermometer is an inexpensive and invaluable
You will feel most comfortable holding your baby in investment.In a public pool,other swimmers will
waist- to chest-deep water,the height of which will generally require lower temperatures so you will need
vary between people,but is usually around 31/2–4 feet to compromise.If the water is less than 85°F (29.5°C),
(1–1.2 m) deep. you may need to shorten the length of your lesson.
It is best to use an area of the pool with an even If your child begins to shiver,has blue lips,is unhappy,
depth or a very gradual slope.When working with a or is less cooperative than usual,get out of the pool,
slope,just be aware of where—and how rapidly— dry off,and warm up.Remember that babies have
the drop-off occurs,and try not to teach near any immature thermal regulatory systems and chill easily.
dramatic drop-off so that you don’t suddenly enter Outdoor hot tubs and Jacuzzis are also not
deep water and lose your footing. recommended for use by babies since temperatures in
these small pools often soar to 103°F (39.5°C),which
Ladder or step access is dangerous as it far exceeds a baby’s normal body
Pool steps can be useful for a number of activities. temperature of 98.6°F (37°C).
For example,they are the ideal place for helping older
children learn to put their faces in the water (see Air temperature
pp80–81).Also the Alligator Walk (see p85) is practiced Take note of the air temperature.Remember that the
on pool steps.Older babies love the independence of amazing thing about an indoor pool is that you might
standing on the steps,kneeling on their hands and be swimming in a warm,heated pool while there is snow
knees,or putting their face into a shallow area of water. on the ground outdoors.Even though the water is
If there is only ladder entry at your chosen pool, heated,you’ll want the surrounding indoor air to keep
then you can still accomplish everything noted above you from feeling chilled.The air temperature indoors
through other activities. should be at least 75°F (24°C),which will be a
comfortable temperature for you in a dry bathing suit
Water cleanliness before you enter the pool.Locker or changing rooms
The pool water should be clear enough so that you can should be kept at a comfortable temperature,too.
easily see the bottom of the pool.Your public facility If you are swimming outdoors then it is best to swim
must adhere to the water quality standards set by your when the air is at least 75°F (24°C),with sunny skies
local government health officials.Acceptable Ph levels are and little or no wind,so there is no wind chill.
between 7.2 and 7.8,with 7.4–7.6 as ideal.The levels of
disinfectant must be high enough to ensure that the THE POOL AS A CLASSROOM
pool water is impeccably clean,but not so strong that When your baby sees your pool classroom,she should
they cause visual or respiratory problems.If,when you get the impression that it is a fun place to learn.Like
place your face in the water,the water hurts your eyes any conscientious and organized teacher,you should
then we recommend not swimming in it with your child. plan a layout of your space and equip your classroom
before you begin.First walk the pool you plan to use
Water temperature without your baby.Check for water clarity,appropriate
Ideally,the water temperature in the pool should be temperature,ease of entry,depths,and slope.Imagine
very warm for babies,and 90–93°F (32–34°C) is where you’ll play the games you’ve planned (see Games
optimal.If you have your own pool,then a pool and Songs,pp48–51).

--- OCR from Page 23 Image 1 ---
Checking the depth

You will feel most comfortable holding your baby in
waist- to chest-deep water, the height of which will
vary between people, but is usually around 3!/2-4 feet
(I-1.2 m) deep.

It is best to use an area of the pool with an even
depth or a very gradual slope. When working with a
slope, just be aware of where—and how rapidly—
the drop-off occurs, and try not to teach near any
dramatic drop-off so that you don’t suddenly enter
deep water and lose your footing.

Ladder or step access
Pool steps can be useful for a number of activities.
For example, they are the ideal place for helping older
children learn to put their faces in the water (see
pp80-81}. Also the Alligator Walk (see p85) is practiced
on pool steps. Older babies love the independence of
standing on the steps, kneeling on their hands and
knees, or putting their face into a shallow area of water.
If there is only ladder entry at your chosen pool,
then you can still accomplish everything noted above
through other activities.

Water cleanliness

The pool water should be clear enough so that you can
easily see the bottom of the pool. Your public facility
must adhere to the water quality standards set by your
local government health officials. Acceptable Ph levels are
between 7.2 and 7.8, with 7.4—7.6 as ideal. The levels of
disinfectant must be high enough to ensure that the
pool water is impeccably clean, but not so strong that
they cause visual or respiratory problems. If, when you
place your face in the water, the water hurts your eyes
then we recommend not swimming in it with your child.

Water temperature

Ideally, the water temperature in the pool should be
very warm for babies, and 9O0~93°F (32—34°C) is
optimal. If you have your own pool, then a pool

CHOOSING A SUITABLE POOL 23

thermometer is an inexpensive and invaluable
investment. In a public pool, other swimmers will
generally require lower temperatures so you will need
to compromise. If the water is less than 85°F (29.5°C),
you may need to shorten the length of your lesson.

If your child begins to shiver, has blue lips, is unhappy,
or is less cooperative than usual, get out of the pool,
dry off, and warm up. Remember that babies have
immature thermal regulatory systems and chill easily.

Outdoor hot tubs and Jacuzzis are also not
recommended for use by babies since temperatures in
these small pools often soar to 103°F (39.5°C), which
is dangerous as it far exceeds a baby’s normal body
temperature of 98.6°F (37°C).

Air temperature
Take note of the air temperature. Remember that the
amazing thing about an indoor pool is that you might
be swimming in a warm, heated pool while there is snow
on the ground outdoors. Even though the water is
heated, you'll want the surrounding indoor air to keep
you from feeling chilled. The air temperature indoors
should be at least 75°F (24°C), which will be a
comfortable temperature for you in a dry bathing suit
before you enter the pool. Locker or changing rooms
should be kept at a comfortable temperature, too.

If you are swimming outdoors then it is best to swim
when the air is at least 75°F (24°C), with sunny skies
and little or no wind, so there is no wind chill.

THE POOL AS A CLASSROOM

When your baby sees your pool classroom, she should
get the impression that it is a fun place to learn. Like
any conscientious and organized teacher, you should
plan a layout of your space and equip your classroom
before you begin. First walk the pool you plan to use
without your baby. Check for water clarity, appropriate
temperature, ease of entry, depths, and slope. Imagine
where you'll play the games you've planned (see Games
and Songs, pp48—51).

--- Page 24 Text ---
24 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
SAFETY
Small children lack the cognitive ability to discern danger,and since water holds endless
fascination for children of all ages you must take every precaution to prevent your
child from entering the pool without you.It is your responsibility to implement safe
procedures and prevent impulsive explorers from entering the water unsupervised.
CONSTANT SUPERVISION Before you start your lessons,prepare an action plan so
It is vital that you never leave a child unattended that you know what to do in case of an emergency.This
either in or around water.This applies whether you will help you to react quickly,calmly,and effectively if
are at a public pool,a friend’s house,at home,or on something untoward happens to your child.
vacation.Remember: Whether in a public or private pool,always check
(cid:2)never leave a child unattended in the bath first that the pool is safe,that no area is overly slippery
(cid:2)always know where your children are,especially when and could cause a child to fall into the pool,and that
the water is clean and clear.
you are near a body of water
(cid:2)never assume someone else is watching your child At a public pool:
(cid:2)make sure that other caregivers understand the (cid:2)check that the locker rooms,shower areas,and deck
importance of constant supervision are safe and well-maintained
(cid:2)maintain constant eye supervision with your child (cid:2)ensure you know where the lifeguards and
when around water emergency telephone are,as well as the rescue poles
(cid:2)teach your child never to go in or near the water or ring buoys
without a parent or caregiver (cid:2)check that the lifeguards are trained in CPR and
(cid:2)if your child begins to walk or run toward the pool First Aid.
without you,emphatically call to her to wait for you,
At a home pool:
then calmly but quickly walk over to her and take her
(cid:2)have a pole and ring buoy by the pool
hand in yours
(cid:2)put toys and other appealing objects out of the pool
(cid:2)if your child is missing,always check the pool or
and pool area when not in use
other bodies of water first
(cid:2)keep a telephone by the pool,and make sure that
(cid:2)do not drink alcohol when supervising children
emergency numbers are stored in the phone’s memory.
(cid:2)keep contact with your baby when in the water.
LEARNING SWIMMING SAFETY SKILLS
BE PREPARED No method of baby swimming can guarantee that your
Familiarize yourself with all nationally recognized pool child will not drown,but by learning to swim,she will
safety standards and teach your children all the pool increase her chance of getting to safety if she finds
and water safety rules.Good safety habits,acquired herself in the water in an unsupervised situation.The
early on,will last a lifetime.Remember that prevention is following safety skills should only be taught at the
always the best cure,and that no child should ever be appropriate age and only when your child is ready.To
considered “drownproof.” maintain the efficiency of the safety skills,you should

--- OCR from Page 24 Image 1 ---
PIN PAW YwYMN I

SAFETY

INS PPP wo VV PEPPrriNow

Small children lack the cognitive ability to discern danger, and since water holds endless

fascination for children of all ages you must take every precaution to prevent your

child from entering the pool without you. It is your responsibility to implement safe

procedures and prevent impulsive explorers from entering the water unsupervised.

CONSTANT SUPERVISION
It is vital that you never leave a child unattended
either in or around water. This applies whether you
are at a public pool, a friend’s house, at home, or on
vacation. Remember:

never leave a child unattended in the bath

always know where your children are, especially when
you are near a body of water

never assume someone else is watching your child

make sure that other caregivers understand the
importance of constant supervision

maintain constant eye supervision with your child
when around water

teach your child never to go in or near the water
without a parent or caregiver

if your child begins to walk or run toward the pool
without you, emphatically call to her to wait for you,
then calmly but quickly walk over to her and take her
hand in yours

if your child is missing, always check the pool or
other bodies of water first

do not drink alcohol when supervising children

keep contact with your baby when in the water.

BE PREPARED

Familiarize yourself with all nationally recognized pool
safety standards and teach your children all the pool
and water safety rules. Good safety habits, acquired
early on, will last a lifetime. Remember that prevention is
always the best cure, and that no child should ever be
considered “drownproof.”

Before you start your lessons, prepare an action plan so
that you know what to do in case of an emergency. This
will help you to react quickly, calmly, and effectively if
something untoward happens to your child.

Whether in a public or private pool, always check
first that the pool is safe, that no area is overly slippery
and could cause a child to fall into the pool, and that
the water is clean and clear.

At a public pool:

check that the locker rooms, shower areas, and deck
are safe and well-maintained

ensure you know where the lifeguards and
emergency telephone are, as well as the rescue poles
or ring buoys

check that the lifeguards are trained in CPR and
First Aid.

At a home pool:

have a pole and ring buoy by the pool

put toys and other appealing objects out of the pool
and pool area when not in use

keep a telephone by the pool, and make sure that
emergency numbers are stored in the phone's memory.

LEARNING SWIMMING SAFETY SKILLS

No method of baby swimming can guarantee that your
child will not drown, but by learning to swim, she will
increase her chance of getting to safety if she finds
herself in the water in an unsupervised situation. The
following safety skills should only be taught at the
appropriate age and only when your child is ready. To
maintain the efficiency of the safety skills, you should

--- Page 25 Text ---
SAFETY 25
reinforce them at least twice a week as part of a
BARRIERS AROUND A
30-minute lesson.Start by teaching your child the
HOME POOL
first skill,and build up a foundation for the next skill.
With proper prerequisites and training:
The abilities of infants and toddlers change
At eight months a baby can begin to learn to hold
from day to day,so make sure that you have
her breath and propel herself through the water with
layers of protection to prevent your child from
confidence.This gives parents a few valuable seconds
accidentally entering the pool area.Remember
if their child enters the water.
that a young child can drown in just a few inches
At 19 months a capable swimmer can begin to learn to of water,so if you are visiting a pool without
return to the side of the pool.By 24 months,this skill child-proof barriers,always make sure that you
may be executed with ease. can see where your child is.If your child is
missing,always check the pool or other bodies
At three years a competent swimmer can begin to learn
of water first.
to lift her head out of the water and take a breath.
At three-and-a-half an experienced swimmer can begin (cid:2)Close and lock all entrances from the house
to learn to back float and roll from her front to her to the pool,spa,or other body of water.
back and then her back to her front. (cid:2)Install an extra lock at the top of any doors
leading to the pool.This should be well above the
CPR AND FIRST AID
reach of children.
We strongly recommend that parents and caregivers are
(cid:2)Completely surround the pool with a mesh-
certified in Infant/Child CPR,First Aid,and Water
type fence.This must be impenetrable by children
Safety.Courses in these skills are run by nationally
from all sides.It should have a high degree of
recognized organizations (see Resources,p124).
transparency and a child-resistant latch.Always
keep the gate closed and latched when the pool
is not in use.If you use a different kind of fence,
make sure that children will not be able to get a
foothold and climb over it.
(cid:2)Install a pool alarm.Some of these detect
motion;others detect a mass in the water.
(cid:2)Use a safety pool cover.This will totally isolate
the pool.Remove the cover completely when the
pool is in use.
(cid:2)If you have an above-ground swimming pool,
secure,lock,or remove any steps when the pool
is not in use.
(cid:2)Install a perimeter fence or wall around your
garden or yard to stop unauthorized access from
the outside.
Having a sturdy,high fencearound your yard and a
good mesh-type pool fence that children cannot climb over
are essential safety requirements if you have a home pool.

--- OCR from Page 25 Image 1 ---
reinforce them at least twice a week as part of a

30-minute lesson. Start by teaching your child the

first skill, and build up a foundation for the next skill.
With proper prerequisites and training:

At eight months a baby can begin to learn to hold

her breath and propel herself through the water with

confidence. This gives parents a few valuable seconds

if their child enters the water.

At 19 months a capable swimmer can begin to learn to

return to the side of the pool. By 24 months, this skill

may be executed with ease.

At three years a competent swimmer can begin to learn

to lift her head out of the water and take a breath.

At three-and-a-half an experienced swimmer can begin

to learn to back float and roll from her front to her

back and then her back to her front.

CPR AND FIRST AID

We strongly recommend that parents and caregivers are
certified in Infant/Child CPR, First Aid, and Water
Safety. Courses in these skills are run by nationally
recognized organizations (see Resources, pl24).

Having a sturdy, high fence around your yard and a

good mesh-type pool fence that children cannot climb over
are essential safety requirements if you have a home pool.

WASNT RE FT

BARRIERS AROUND A
HOME POOL

The abilities of infants and toddlers change

from day to day, so make sure that you have
layers of protection to prevent your child from
accidentally entering the pool area. Remember
that a young child can drown in just a few inches
of water, so if you are visiting a pool without
child-proof barriers, always make sure that you
can see where your child is. If your child is
missing, always check the pool or other bodies

of water first.
Close and lock all entrances from the house

o the pool, spa, or other body of water

Install an extra lock at the top of any doors
eading to the pool. This should be well above the
reach of children.

Completely surround the pool with a mesh-

ype fence. This must be impenetrable by children
from all sides. It should have a high degree of
ransparency and a child-resistant latch. Always
keep the gate closed and latched when the pool
is not in use. If you use a different kind of fence,
make sure that children will not be able to get a

foothold and climb over it.

Install a pool alarm. Some of these detect
motion; others detect a mass in the water
Use a safety poo! cover This will totally isolate

he pool. Remove the cover completely when the

pool is in use.

If you have an above-ground swimming pool,

secure, lock, or remove any steps when the pool
is not in use.

Install a perimeter fence or wall around your

garden or yard to stop unauthorized access from

the outside.

--- OCR from Page 25 Image 2 ---
Having a sturdy, high fence around your yard and a
s00d mesh-tyne pool fence that children cannot climb over

moti

DOO

© If

is not in
make sur
foothold

Install

on; ¢

Use a

he pool.

is In

you

Secu

re, Ic

is not in

Install

gard

en oO

the outs!

--- Page 26 Text ---
26 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
WHAT YOU NEED—THE BASICS
We suggest that you pack a swimming bag (like a diaper bag) for your baby,and restock
it after each lesson.As well as a swimsuit,towel,and swimming diapers,don’t forget to
take sunblock,ear drops,a change of clothes,and a snack for your child.
SWIMSUIT
Your child’s swimsuit should fit comfortably and have OPTIONAL EXTRAS
snug elastic around the legs for girls,and waist and legs
for boys.Rinse and dry the suit after swimming. As your lessons progress,you may want to
add some extra items to your swimming bag
SWIMMING DIAPERS (see Resources,pp124–25).
Non-toilet-trained babies should always wear a swim (cid:2)A silicone swim cap.This slips easily on and off
diaper,and in some countries this must be worn with a a baby’s head without tugging at her hair.
swimsuit.You can use either a re-useable,washable nylon (cid:2)A neoprene wetsuit for cold weather.
swim diaper,or a specially designed disposable swim (cid:2)Mesh and rubber pool shoes for use with
diaper.For older children,you could use a swimsuit with
flexible rubber fins.
a built-in diaper or liner.Unlike regular disposable (cid:2)Goggles.Buy anti-fog,anti-leak goggles that fit
diapers,which aren’t suitable for swimming,disposable
snugly on your child’s face.
swim diapers will not break apart in the pool,nor will
they absorb pool water and weigh your baby down.
The two layers of protection—the swim diaper and the
In some public pools
swimsuit—should contain any accident and give you
your child will have to wear
time to get your child out of the pool to change him.
a swim diaper and swimsuit—
It is a good idea to take a spare diaper to the pool.
although some diapers and
swimsuits are made to be
worn on their own. SUNBLOCK
If swimming outdoors,you will need to apply a high-
SPF waterproof child’s sunblock.To maximize protection,
apply to exposed areas half an hour before entering the
pool.This allows time for the sunblock to be thoroughly
absorbed into the skin and it will be less likely to run
into your child’s eyes.Since sunblock stings and irritates
the eyes,be very careful how you apply it.
WHAT PARENTSNEED
You will require a serviceable,baby-proof swimsuit that
won’t fall off when your child tugs it,waterproof
sunblock,a towel,and a change of clean,dry clothes.

--- OCR from Page 26 Image 1 ---
the

tion,
the
ishly
m
tates

hat

--- OCR from Page 26 Image 2 ---
swim diaper, Or a Specially designed disposable Swim
diaper. For older children, you could use a swimsuit with
a built-in diaper or liner. Unlike regular disposable
diapers, which aren’t suitable for swimming, disposable
swim diapers will not break apart in the pool, nor will
they absorb pool water and weigh your baby down.

5

In some public pools
your child will have to wear

a swim diaper and swimsuit—

although some diapers and
swimsuits are made to be
worn on their own.

Mesh and rubber pool shoes for
flexible rubber fins.
Goggles. Buy anti-fog, anti-leak go

snugly on your child's face.

The two layers of protection—the swir
swimsuit—should contain any accident
time to get your child out of the poo!
It is a good idea to take a spare diaper

SUNBLOCK

lf swimming outdoors, you will need t
SPF waterproof child’s sunblock. To ma
apply to exposed areas half an hour be
pool. This allows time for the sunblock
absorbed into the skin and it will be le
into your child’s eyes. Since sunblock s
the eyes, be very careful how you appl

WHAT PARENTS NEED

You will require a serviceable, baby-pro
won't fall off when your child tugs it, \
sunblock, a towel, and a change of clea

--- Page 27 Text ---
WHAT YOU NEED—THE BASICS 27
You may want to Apply sunblock 30 minutes before you
purchase a sun-protective enter the pool so that it soaks into the
suit (see Resources, skin.Remember to reapply it regularly
pp124–25) for your
child to use for outdoor
swimming in sunny
climates,or for fair-
skinned children.It should
be made of fabric that has
ultraviolet protection.
These suits not only stop
the sun’s rays,but also
help to block the wind
Pack everything you
need in a mesh
swimming bag.Make
sure you have a large,
dry towel,sunblock,
ear drops,and a snack
for your child
Fins are used to improve
kicking and help young
Swimmer’s ear dropswill evaporate
Goggles help protect against the effects of swimmers get the feel of the
any water left in the ear after swimming.
pool chemicals,and can greatly benefit water.They also help to
hesitant children.Children over the age of correctly position the feet Put two to three drops in each ear after
three are most likely to keep googles on near the surface of the water swimming (see also p33).

--- OCR from Page 27 Image 1 ---
WHAT YOU NEED—THE BASICS 27

You may want to Apply sunblock 30 minutes before you
purchase a sun-protective enter the pool so that it soaks into the
suit (see Resources, skin. Remember to reapply it regularly

pp|24-25) for your
child to use for outdoor
swimming in sunny j a.
climates, or for fair- 7"
skinned children. It should =
be made of fabric that has .
ultraviolet protection.
These suits not only stop
the sun’s rays, but also
help to block the wind

|

— ©

Pack everything you
need in a mesh
swimming bag. Make
sure you have a large,
dry towel, sunblock,
ear drops, and a snack
for your child

Fins are used to improve

kicking and help young Swimmer’s ear drops will evaporate

Goggles help protect against the effects of swimmers get the feel of the left in th ft —
pool chemicals, and can greatly benefit water. They also help to AMY) SENSU SHAS LN inks: Gelmenissie sca linlatl lifes
hesitant children. Children over the age of correctly position the feet Put two to three drops in each ear after

three are most likely to keep googles on near the surface of the water swimming (see also p33).

--- OCR from Page 27 Image 2 ---
e used to improve

--- Page 28 Text ---
28 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
TOYS AND LEARNING AIDS
Visit any good early education center and you will see that toys,songs,and games are used
to create a stimulating environment.A watery classroom should be no different—so use
these suggestions for toys and aids to help your child learn to swim.Don’t worry if you
don’t have everything,since you can improvise with other toys and household equipment.
Toys are a vital component of this swimming program TOYSFORBEGINNERS
(see Resources,pp124–25).They can be used to Floating toys and balls can be used to encourage your
encourage a child to do an activity,as a reward,or as a child to swim toward you and,along with buckets and
distraction after trying a new technique.Depending on a floating baby pool,are used in a number of games.
the pool you are using and your mode of Noodles are good for balancing on,while dive rings are
transportation,you can either accessorize your classes fun to duck underwater for.
with everything shown below,or take just a few things
with you in a bag when you go to the pool,such as AIDSFOR INTERMEDIATES
your child’s favorite floating toys and balls,a bucket,a Barbells,hoops,goggles,fins,and kickboards are best
colander or small watering can,and some dive rings. used by intermediate and older swimmers who have
already mastered the basic skills.
basketball hoop mesh bag and towel
buckets
noodles
dive rings and toys

--- OCR from Page 28 Image 1 ---
28 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING

TOYS AND LEARNING AIDS

Visit any good early education center and you will see that toys, songs, and games are used

to create a stimulating environment. A watery classroom should be no different—so use

these suggestions for toys and aids to help your child learn to swim. Don’t worry if you

don’t have everything, since you can improvise with other toys and household equipment.

Toys are a vital component of this swimming program
(see Resources, ppl24—25)}. They can be used to
encourage a child to do an activity, as a reward, or as a
distraction after trying a new technique. Depending on
the pool you are using and your mode of
transportation, you can either accessorize your classes
with everything shown below, or take just a few things
with you in a bag when you go to the pool, such as
your child’s favorite floating toys and balls, a bucket, a
colander or small watering can, and some dive rings.

basketball hoop

noodles

TOYS FOR BEGINNERS

Floating toys and balls can be used to encourage your
child to swim toward you and, along with buckets and
a floating baby pool, are used in a number of games.
Noodles are good for balancing on, while dive rings are
fun to duck underwater for.

AIDS FOR INTERMEDIATES

Barbells, hoops, goggles, fins, and kickboards are best
used by intermediate and older swimmers who have
already mastered the basic skills.

mesh bag and towel

dive rings and toys

--- Page 29 Text ---
TOYS AND LEARNING AIDS 29
Use a variety of toys every lesson,either as an Wearing fins(top) not only lets your child swim
enticement to swim toward,a reward,or a distraction farther,but helps to tone,and condition the leg muscles.
for your child after he has attempted a new skill.
Swimming through a hoop(above) provides a focus
for your child and encourages proper body alignment.
barbell
kickboard
goggles
fins
floating pool
floating balls
hoops

--- OCR from Page 29 Image 1 ---
TOYS AND LEARNING AIDS 29

Use a variety of toys every lesson, either as an Wearing fins (top) not only lets your child swim
enticement to swim toward, a reward, or a distraction farther, but helps to tone, and condition the leg muscles.
for your child after he has attempted a new skill.

Swimming through a hoop (above) provides a focus

for your child and encourages proper body alignment.

barbell

kickboard

=z floating pool

floating balls

--- OCR from Page 29 Image 3 ---
lesson, either as an Wearing fins (top) not only lets your child swim

reward, or a distraction farther, but helps to tone, and condition the leg muscles.

2mpted a new skill.

--- OCR from Page 29 Image 4 ---
TOYS AND LEARNING AIDS 29

er as an Wearing fins (top) not only lets your child swim

--- Page 30 Text ---
30 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
PARENTAL CONCERNS watching and playing with their peers.Make sure that there
is a positive atmosphere with songs,games,and happy
I can’t swim,and I’m afraid of the water.Can I still teach babies,and that there is a good rapport between the
my baby to swim? teacher,children,and parents.The teacher should be
As long as you can comfortably stand in waist- to chest- patient,enthusiastic,and focused on their class,knowing
deep water,you’ll have no problem.You don’t need to go when and how to introduce skills gradually and sequentially
underwater or be able to swim in order to teach your in the curriculum and at the child’s level of readiness.
child.Just act confidently and happily so you don’t transfer
AGE-RELATED QUERIES
any anxieties you may have to your child.Often,non-
swimming parents who witness the joy of baby swimming
Do I really have to wait for my baby to be six months old
become relaxed enough to give swimming another chance.
before I start teaching her to swim?
I am nervous about teaching my baby on my own. In our experience,starting formal instruction when your
What can I do? child is at least six months old is sensible.She has a medical
How about asking a group of like-minded friends,relatives, history by six months,her head and neck strength have
or neighbors and their babies to join you? Not only will improved,and her level of alertness has increased.Plus,you
you feel happier with the support of other adults in the have gained a comfort level in caring for your child.There’s
water,but the group energy is contagious and puts also a lot you can do prior to six months to prepare her
everyone in a happy,playful,encouraging mood.Babies are for her first swimming lessons (see Bathtime Fun,pp38–39).
taught in group classes at our swim school as we find
children learn best when swimming with other children.
Who can substitute for me in the water if I can’t get in
the pool with my baby?
Your child will succeed best when she has a trusted,familiar
caregiver with her in the pool—for example,a grandparent,
uncle,or babysitter.Just make sure that your substitute fully
understands the gentle nature of this child-centered
approach and follows the teaching instructions carefully.
I’m pregnant.Can I still teach my baby to swim?
At any one time,nearly a quarter of the mothers in our
swim school are pregnant.As long as you get clearance
from your physician,there is no reason why you shouldn’t
give your child swimming lessons.
I want to take my baby to swim classes as well as
teaching her myself,but how do I choose a good one?
There are a number of highly recommended classes with
a strong local or national reputation,but you should still
make sure the class meets your criteria for your child.
We recommend group classes as children benefit from

--- OCR from Page 30 Image 1 ---
30 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

PARENTAL CONCERNS

| can’t swim, and I’m afraid of the water. Can | still teach
my baby to swim?

As long as you can comfortably stand in waist- to chest-
deep water you'll have no problem. You don't need to go
underwater or be able to swim in order to teach your
child. Just act confidently and happily so you don't transfer
any anxieties you may have to your child. Often, non-

swimming parents who witness the joy of baby swimming

become relaxed enough to give swimming another chance.

lam nervous about teaching my baby on my own.

What can | do?

How about asking a group of like-minded friends, relatives,
or neighbors and their babies to join you? Not only will
you feel happier with the support of other adults in the
water, but the group energy Is contagious and puts
everyone in a happy, playful, encouraging mood. Babies are
taught in group classes at our swim school as we find

children learn best when swimming with other children.

Who can substitute for me in the water if | can’t get in
the pool with my baby?

Your child will succeed best when she has a trusted, familiar
caregiver with her in the pool—for example, a grandparent,
uncle, or babysitter Just make sure that your substitute fully
understands the gentle nature of this child-centered

approach and follows the teaching instructions carefully.

I'm pregnant. Can | still teach my baby to swim?

At any one time, nearly a quarter of the mothers in our
swim school are pregnant. As long as you get clearance
from your physician, there is no reason why you shouldn't

give your child swimming lessons.

| want to take my baby to swim classes as well as
teaching her myself, but how do | choose a good one?
There are a number of highly recommended classes with
a strong local or national reputation, but you should still
make sure the class meets your criteria for your child.

We recommend group classes as children benefit from

watching and playing with their peers. Make sure that there
is a positive atmosphere with songs, games, and happy
babies, and that there is a good rapport between the
teacher, children, and parents. The teacher should be
patient, enthusiastic, and focused on their class, knowing

when and how to introduce skills gradually and sequentially

in the curriculum and at the child’s level of readiness.

AGE-RELATED QUERIES

Do | really have to wait for my baby to be six months old
before | start teaching her to swim?

n our experience, starting formal instruction when your
child is at least six months old is sensible. She has a medical
history by six months, her head and neck strength have
improved, and her level of alertness has increased. Plus, you
have gained a comfort level in caring for your child. There's

also a lot you can do prior to six months to prepare her

for her first swimming lessons (see Bathtime Fun, pp38—39).

--- OCR from Page 30 Image 2 ---
pee

r another chance.

my own.

friends, relatives,
Not only will
r adults in the
and puts
nood, Babies are

| as we find

ther children.

if | can’t get in

a trusted, familiar
le, a grandparent,
ur substitute fully
-centered

ions carefully.

swim?
jyothers in our
get clearance

ly you shouldn't

s well as

a good one?
ed classes with
ou should still
- your child.
benefit from

Do | really have to wait for my baby to be six months old
before | start teaching her to swim?

n our experience, starting formal instruction when your
child is at least six months old is sensible. She has a medical
history by six months, her head and neck strength have
improved, and her level of alertness has increased. Plus, you
have gained a comfort level in caring for your child. There's

also a lot you can do prior to six months to prepare her

for her first swimming lessons (see Bathtime Fun, pp38—39).

--- Page 31 Text ---
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 31
My daughter is nearly four. Am I too late to start
teaching her to swim?
It is never too late to learn how to swim! We like to start
babies before 19 months as younger babies usually love the
water and aren’t testing their limits (or their parents’) as
toddlers often are.For older children,fear may be more of
a factor due to the child’s increased understanding of her
physical world,her actions,and the concept of danger.
However,it is a thrill to teach beginner three- and four-
year-olds.They may require more patience,more play,and
more trust building,but their imaginations are developing,
they are more verbal,their sense of humor can be tapped,
and their pride once they learn something as momentous
as swimming is incredible to watch.It may take your older
baby longer to adjust to the water and learn the initial
skills,but once she gains her confidence,her more mature
physical abilities,coordination,and ability to comprehend months,gradually adding and refining skills.For frightened
and follow directions will allow her to move more rapidly children or those who have had a bad water experience,
through the program than a younger baby would. four lessons per week is essential for overcoming
apprehension and slowly building trust and comfort.
My three-year-old is so stubborn.How will I ever
teach her to swim? What happens if I can’t take my child swimming as often
Start by simply playing.Use toys,songs,and games to as you suggest I should?
demonstrate what fun the two of you will have in the Many busy family schedules do not permit four days of
water (see Games and Songs,pp48–51).Don’t make practice per week,but if you can visit the pool at least
the pool a battlefield—make it fun with lots of toys,balls, twice a week the learning will progress smoothly over a
cups,and colanders she can play with and manipulate. more extended and gradual time-frame.As you will be
Concentrate at first on things she finds interesting,then spending less time in the pool practicing skills,you should
once you establish a learning rapport,you can slowly try to have additional bathtime sessions during the week to
incorporate new skills into your play. reinforce the pool lessons through songs and water play.
THE BEST WAY TO LEARN When is the best time to practice?
Babies learn best when they are comfortable,rested,alert,
How often should we take our baby swimming? and fed.Choose a time midway between sleep or nap
“A little bit on a lot of days”is best.The more frequently times,for example during the morning or early evening.
you swim with your baby,the more natural the learning will Nap times vary and they often change for individuals
be.Watch how your baby practices crawling at home,and during the course of learning to swim.This is normal and
note how she learns a little bit every day and tries again can be due to age,developmental growth,change of
and again,improving as time progresses.Because a baby schedule,or even the seasons,so adjust your swimming
can’t swim in the pool by herself,you need to build her lessons accordingly.Try not to have to wake a sleeping
consistent,frequent lessons into your schedule.We have baby for a swimming lesson,as your child is likely to be
found that in baby swimming,particularly at the start, cranky and uncooperative.You can feed your baby before
optimal learning consists of practicing four times per week, your lesson,but make sure you don’t start swimming with
for 30 minutes each session,over a course of weeks and her for at least half-an-hour after you have fed her.

--- OCR from Page 31 Image 1 ---
My daughter is nearly four. Am | too late to start

teaching her to sw

It Is never too late

oddlers often are.

a factor due to the

babies before 19 months as younger bal

im?

For older children, fe

child’s increased und

o learn how to swim! We like to start

bies usually love the

water and aren't testing their limits (or their parents’) as

ar may be more of

lerstanding of her

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

31

physical world, her actions, and the concept of danger.

However, it is a thrill to teach beginner three- and four

year-olds. They may require more patience, more play, and

ng,
mor can be tapped,

more trust building, but their imaginations are developi

heir sense of hu

hey are more verbal,

and their pride once they learn something as momentous

as swimming |s incredible to watch. lt may take your older

baby longer to adjust to the water and learn the initial

skills, but once she gains her confidence, her more mature

months, gradually adding and refining skills. For frightened

physical abilities, coordination, and ability to comprehend

and follow directions will allow her to move more rapidly children or those who have had a bad water experience,

hrough the program four lessons per week is essential for overcoming

han a younger baby would.
apprehension and slowly building trust and comfort.
My three-year-old is so stubborn. How will | ever

aeach lear we anti What happens if | can’t take my child swimming as often

Start by simply playing. Use toys, songs, and games to as you suggest | should?

demonstrate what fun the two of you will have in the any busy family schedules do not permit four days of

water (see Games and Songs, pp48-5 1). Don't make practice per week, but if you can visit the pool at least

the pool a battlefield—make it fun with lots of toys, balls, twice a week the learning will progress smoothly over a

cups, and colanders she can play with and manipulate. more extended and gradual time-frame. As you will be

Concentrate at first on things she finds interesting, then spending less time in the pool practicing skills, you should

once you establish a learning rapport, you can slowly ry to have additional bathtime sessions during the week to

incorporate new skills into your play. reinforce the pool lessons through songs and water play.

When is the best time to practice?

THE BEST WAY TO LEARN

Babies learn best when they are comfortable, rested, alert,
How often should we take our baby swimming? and fed. Choose a time midway between sleep or nap

“A little brt on a lot of days” is best. The more frequently imes, for example during the morning or early evening.

you swim with your baby, the more natural the learning will ap times vary and they often change for individuals

be. Watch how your baby practices crawling at home, and during the course of leaning to swim. This is normal and
note how she learns a little bit every day and tries again can be due to age, developmental growth, change of

and again, improving as time progresses. Because a baby schedule, or even the seasons, so adjust your swimming
can't swim in the pool by herself, you need to build her lessons accordingly. Iry not to have to wake a sleeping
consistent, frequent lessons into your schedule. We have baby for a swimming lesson, as your child is likely to be
found that in baby swimming, particularly at the start, cranky and uncooperative. You can feed your baby before

your lesson, but make sure you don't start swimming with

optimal learning consists of practicing four times per week,

for 30 minutes each session, over a course of weeks and her for at least hal-an-hour after you have fed her

--- OCR from Page 31 Image 2 ---
Am |

too late to start

aw to swim! We like to start

ounger ba

bies usually love the

limits (or their parents’) as

children, fe

ar may be more of

eased understanding of her

d the concept of danger.

beg
jore

imag

nse of humor can be tap
mn something as moment
vatch.

vater and learn the initial

patience, more play,

inations are develop

It may take your o

-onfidence, her more ma

and

nner three- and four

and
ing
ped,
ous

der

Ure

abiltty to comprehend

w her to move more rap

/ounger baby would.

idly

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 31

months, gradually adding and refining skills. For frightened

children or those who have had a bad water experience,

four lessons per week is essential for overcoming

en Qa OO 0

--- Page 32 Text ---
32 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING
Can Iuse toys,songs,and games in my lessons,or will when used as supplements to your lessons,these devices
they distract my child? can provide an alternative way for your child to play in the
We use toys to our benefit—as motivation,a reward,and a pool,and may encourage kicking and water adjustment.
distraction to redirect attention.By using toys your child will
SAFETYCONCERNS
learn about manipulating his environment—while playing at
the Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47),he will discover
How can I choose a good pool to take my baby to?
which objects float,which sink,and how liquid conforms to
Make sure that the pool and changing facilities are well-
the container it fills.Songs provide a needed diversionary
maintained,clean,and safe,and that the water is clear and
break or rest following busier,more active exercise.Songs
warm (90–93°F/32–34°C is best).The water should be
and games also enhance child development on many levels,
disinfected so that it is clear,not cloudy,but there shouldn’t
including helping the development of motor skills and tactile
be an overwhelming smell of chemicals.Check if or where
stimulation.(See also Toys and Learning Aids,pp28–29,and
the pool slopes into the deep end,and make sure you
Games and Songs,pp48–51.)
know where the lifeguards are located.(See also Choosing
Can I vary how often Iteach my child? a Suitable Pool,pp22–23.)
Once a beginner has established his foundation skills,ideally
How soon can I teach my baby water safety rules?
by having four lessons a week,switching to the twice-a-
Because young babies comprehend language before they
week format for intermediate and advanced skills is often
can actually speak,you can start shaping safety practices
easier to sustain for busy families.By this point,your child
and setting pool rules very early on.In this book,you will
will be familiar with the structure of the lesson and all its
elements.However,remember that if you go to the pool
less often,you will need to adjust your teaching methods
and introduce new skills more slowly.You may also find that
only going twice a week is not providing enough water
time,exposure,or practice for your child,and if this is the
case,then increase the number of times you go.In addition,
if your child is very clingy or apprehensive,going swimming
more often will result in a better,more relaxed,natural
atmosphere for him.
Can I use inflatable water wings,buoyancy trainer
swimsuits,or flotation devices?
Various swim aids are acceptable if used solely as a
supplement to your lessons,but several problems exist with
their use.First,if you put your child in a flotation device
(water wings,tube,buoyancy swimsuit,or similar),you must
remain within hand’s reach of him.These items are not
lifesaving devices,and a child may get in trouble if not
carefully watched.Second,all of these devices are ultimately
designed to keep your child’s head out of the water.Since
we are trying to teach a flat,horizontal position with your
child’s face in the water,this awkward position with the
head out of the water can establish technique problems or
bad habits that must then be overcome.On the plus side,

--- OCR from Page 32 Image 1 ---
32 INTRODUCING BABY SWIMMING

Can | use toys, songs, and games in my lessons, or will
they distract my child?

We use toys to our benefit—as motivation, a reward, and a
distraction to redirect attention. By using toys your child will
earn about manipulating his environment—while playing at
he Water Pouring Station (see pp46—47), he will discover
which objects float, which sink, and how liquid conforms to
he container it fills. Songs provide a needed diversionary
break or rest following busier more active exercise. Songs

and games also enhance child development on many levels,

including helping the development of motor skills and tactile

stimulation. (See also Toys and Learning Aids, pp28—29, and
Games and Songs, pp48—5 1.)

Can | vary how often | teach my child?

Once a beginner has established his foundation skills, ideally
by having four lessons a week, switching to the twice-a-
week format for intermediate and advanced skills is often
easier to sustain for busy families. By this point, your child
will be familiar with the structure of the lesson and all its

elements. However, remember that if you go to the pool

less often, you will need to adjust your teaching methods

and introduce new skills more slowly. You may also find that

only going twice a week Is not providing enough water
time, exposure, or practice for your child, and if this is the

case, then increase the number of times you go. In addition,

if your child is very clingy or apprehensive, going swimming

more often will result in a better more relaxed, natural

atmosphere for him.

Can | use inflatable water wings, buoyancy trainer
swimsuits, or flotation devices?

Various swim aids are acceptable if used solely as a
supplement to your lessons, but several problems exist with
their use. First, if you put your child in a flotation device
(water wings, tube, buoyancy swimsuit, or similar), you must
remain within hand's reach of him. These items are not
lifesaving devices, and a child may get in trouble if not

carefully watched. Second, all of these devices are ultimately

designed to keep your child’s head out of the water Since

we are trying to teach a flat, horizontal position with your

child's face in the water, this awkward position with the

head out of the water can establish technique problems or

bad habits that must then be overcome. On the plus side,

when used as supplements to your lessons, these devices
can provide an alternative way for your child to play in the

pool, and may encourage kicking and water adjustment.

SAFETY CONCERNS

How can | choose a good pool to take my baby to?

ake sure that the pool and changing facilities are well-

maintained, clean, and safe, and that the water is clear and
warm (90—93°F/32—34°C is best). The water should be
disinfected so that it is clear, not cloudy, but there shouldn't
be an overwhelming smell of chemicals. Check if or where

he pool slopes into the deep end, and make sure you

know where the lifeguards are located. (See also Choosing
a Suitable Pool, pp22—23.)

How soon can | teach my baby water safety rules?
Because young babies comprehend language before they

can actually speak, you can start shaping safety practices

and setting pool rules very early on. In this book, you will

--- OCR from Page 32 Image 2 ---
2 DY Ulls POI, YOU China _— _— _—
and setting pool rules very early on. In this book, you will

e of the lesson and all its
‘hat if you go to the pool
st your teaching methods
lowly. You may also find that
»roviding enough water
‘our child, and if this is the

of times you go. In addition,

orehensive, going swimming

F more relaxed, natural

s, buoyancy trainer

e if used solely as a

several problems exist with
hild in a flotation device
imsuit, or similar), you must
rm. These items are not
yy get in trouble if no
hese devices are ultimately
ad out of the water Since

rizontal position with your

ward position with the

lish technique problems or

ercome. On the plus side,

--- Page 33 Text ---
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 33
see that children are taught not to jump until the count of Can premature and physically or mentally challenged
“three.”Waiting for the count of “three”is critical as it babies learn to swim?
reinforces the fact that pool entry requires adult permission The forgiving buoyancy of water and the gentleness of this
and does not just happen when the child wants it to.Once program,coupled with the focus on parental bonding,is
your baby starts to walk,begin establishing a simple routine. outstanding therapy.We have taught premature infants,
Never let your child walk toward the pool without you,but babies who are developmentally delayed or have autism or
take his hand in yours and walk together.This early Down Syndrome,and babies with physical limitations or
repetition will often result in your child actually seeking out muscular weaknesses—all have thrived in the water.Just
your hand prior to approaching the pool.(See also Safety, check with your pediatrician before you start lessons.
pp24–25,and Learning to Wait,p76.)
If my child has asthma or allergies can I take him
There is so much concrete in and around pools,how can swimming,or will it make his condition worse?
I protect my baby from bumps and scrapes? As always,you must clear all pre-existing medical conditions
Hard surfaces can spell potential accidents.When on the with your pediatrician before starting swimming lessons.
deck,practice walking,rather than running,with your child Some research has found that swimming may be less likely
toward the pool.Verbally point out the fact that,“We walk, to produce symptoms in children with asthma than other
not run,when going to the pool.”Avoid obviously slick or forms of exercise.This is thought to be because the humid
wet surfaces if you are carrying your child.Once in the air in the pool area doesn’t irritate the respiratory system
pool,practice unaided swims in open areas away from as much as dry air does.Generally,very few allergies are
walls.When practicing swims for which you approach the triggered by swimming,although there are a few children
wall,move more slowly and deliberately.Your adult walking who are sensitive to chlorine.
pace toward the wall will allow your child to swim at the
Is my child likely to develop an ear infection as a
actual speed he kicks in the water and will avoid
result of swimming?
accelerating him toward concrete surfaces.
If you take preventative measures—using ear drops after
HEALTH-RELATED CONCERNS each swim—your child is unlikely to get a swimmer’s ear
infection.As a baby can’t unclog a water-blocked ear,it will
Should my baby be inoculated before swimming classes or be your measures that will make sure trapped water
prior to entering a public pool? doesn’t turn into a bacterial ear infection.Buy ready-made
Just as you would do for any other physical activity,your ear drops at your drugstore,and put two or three drops in
child should be cleared by your pediatrician before enrolling each ear after swimming.
in swimming classes,or before you begin teaching him at
How can I tell if my baby has an ear infection?
home.By the age of six months,most babies have received
If your child tugs at his ear or tries to put his finger in
preliminary shots.Before you go swimming,also make sure
his ear and is irritable,he may have swimmer’s ear (otitis
that you and your child are free of contagious diseases,and
externa) and you should take him to see your pediatrician.
neither of you has open cuts or sores.
If treatment is required then do not take your child
My baby has a cough and runny nose—can we still go swimming until the problem has cleared up.The other
swimming together? common ear infections are middle ear infections (otitis
It is not normally advisable to go swimming if your baby has media),which seem to be unrelated to swimming and
a cold,as he will have a harder time holding his breath and result from colds,congestion,allergies etc.Your physician
exercising,and he may not feel like going in the water at all. will advise you whether your child can swim.If frequent ear
Just rest at home until he feels better.On your return to infections have necessitated “tubes”being placed in his ears,
the water,take it easy;his skills may be a little rusty. consult your physician about the measures you should take.

--- OCR from Page 33 Image 1 ---
see that children are taught not to jump until the count of
“three.” Waiting for the count of “three” is critical as it
reinforces the fact that pool entry requires adult permission
and does not just happen when the child wants it to. Once

your baby starts to walk, begin establishing a simple routine.

ever let your child walk toward the pool without you, but

ake his hand in yours and walk together This early

repetition will often result in your child actually seeking out

your hand prior to approaching the pool. (See also Safety,
pp24—25, and Learning to Wait, p76.)

There is so much concrete in and around pools, how can
| protect my baby from bumps and scrapes?

Hard surfaces can spell potential accidents. When on the
deck, practice walking, rather than running, with your child
oward the pool. Verbally point out the fact that, “We walk,
not run, when going to the pool.’ Avoid obviously slick or

wet surfaces if you are carrying your child. Once in the

pool, practice unaided swims in open areas away from

walls. When practicing swims for which you approach the

wall, move more slowly and deliberately. Your adult walking

pace toward the wall will allow your child to swim at the

actual speed he kicks in the water and will avoid

accelerating him toward concrete surfaces.

HEALTH-RELATED CONCERNS

Should my baby be inoculated before swimming classes or
prior to entering a public pool?

ust as you would do for any other physical activity, your
child should be cleared by your pediatrician before enrolling
in swimming classes, or before you begin teaching him at
home. By the age of six months, most babies have received
preliminary shots. Before you go swimming, also make sure

hat you and your child are free of contagious diseases, and

neither of you has open cuts or sores.

My baby has a cough and runny nose—can we still go
swimming together?

It is not normally advisable to go swimming if your baby has
a cold, as he will have a harder time holding his breath and
exercising, and he may not feel like going in the water at all.
Just rest at home until he feels better On your return to

the water, take it easy; his skills may be a little rusty.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 33

Can premature and physically or mentally challenged
babies learn to swim?

The forgiving buoyancy of water and the gentleness of this
program, coupled with the focus on parental bonding, is
outstanding therapy. We have taught premature infants,
babies who are developmentally delayed or have autism or
Down Syndrome, and babies with physical limitations or

muscular weaknesses—all have thrived in the water Just

check with your pediatrician before you start lessons.

If my child has asthma or allergies can | take him
swimming, or will it make his condition worse?

As always, you must clear all pre-existing medical conditions
with your pediatrician before starting swimming lessons.
Some research has found that swimming may be less likely
to produce symptoms in children with asthma than other
forms of exercise. This is thought to be because the humid

air in the pool area doesn't irritate the respiratory system

as much as dry air does. Generally, very few allergies are

triggered by swimming, although there are a few children

who are sensitive to chlorine.

Is my child likely to develop an ear infection as a

result of swimming?

If you take preventative measures—using ear drops after
each swim—your child is unlikely to get a swimmer’s ear
infection. As a baby can’t unclog a waterblocked ear it will
be your measures that will make sure trapped water
doesn’t turn into a bacterial ear infection. Buy ready-made
ear drops at your drugstore, and put two or three drops in

each ear after swimming.

How can | tell if my baby has an ear infection?

If your child tugs at his ear or tries to put his finger in

his ear and is irritable, he may have swimmer’s ear (otitis
externa) and you should take him to see your pediatrician.

lf treatment is required then do not take your child

swimming until the problem has cleared up. The other

common ear infections are middle ear infections (otitis

media), which seem to be unrelated to swimming and

result from colds, congestion, allergies etc. Your physician

will advise you whether your child can swim. If frequent ear

infections have necessitated “tubes” being placed in his ears,

consult your physician about the measures you should take.

--- Page 34 Text ---
Baby being held,coming up from a submersion,happy
happy.Slade

--- Page 35 Text ---
wat e r
con f i d e n c e
Come on in… the water’s waiting! Whether your baby is just six months or
nearly four years old, this chapter shows you enticing learn-through-play
strategies to teach him essential foundation skills. From early fun and play
in the bathtub, to safely entering the pool, holding your child in the water,
and using toys, games, and songs, this chapter prepares you for your first
lessons.The initial step is water adjustment, in which your baby learns to be
comfortable in the pool.Then, based on his readiness, you’ll teach him to
hold his breath when submerging on cue.With time, practice, and
proficiency, you’ll let go of him for a solo swim. Finally, you will witness the
event that is the goal of this chapter—your baby swimming freely between
his parents for five seconds—a wonderful achievement.

--- OCR from Page 35 Image 1 ---
\
COP}

Come on in... the
nearly four years
strategies to teacl

in the bathtub, to
and using toys, g

lessons. The initial
comfortable in tt
hold his breat
proficiency, you'll |
event that is the ¢

his pare

--- Page 36 Text ---
36 WATER CONFIDENCE
TEACHING BEGINNERS
Parents of all beginners,whether six months or four years old,should start here.Some of
you may have never taken your child to a pool,some may have played with your baby in
the water or even submerged your child.Whatever level you are at,start at the beginning
of the program and gradually,with practice,your child will gain confidence in the water.
BATHTIME FUN USING THE LESSON PLANS
Even before your first trip to the pool,get your child Lesson plans are given at the start of each stage of the
accustomed to water during her bath (see pp38–39).If skills for beginners.These are suggestions for fast-paced
she loves the water,we want to keep it that way;if she 30-minute lessons,allowing you to practice the skills
doesn’t care for it,we want to improve the situation. you teach your child in fun,inviting ways.By following
Remember the key approaches of the program—gradual, the plans,your child will practice a wide range of skills
long-term,child-centered,playful,developmentally and without you losing her attention.The structure of the
age-appropriate—and put these into practice in the tub. plans,and the focus on the routine of the Activity
Circuit,also bring familiarity and consistency to your
WATER ADJUSTMENT swimming sessions,so your child will come to look
Getting your child used to the water,and helping her forward to each successive part of the lesson.
to learn to love it,is a key part of this program.The When you start teaching your child to swim,simply
first stage of water adjustment happens in the bath. play with her in the water.Then,once you feel she is
Once your child is happy playing in the bath,you can ready,introduce the exercises in Stage One (see pp54–69)
transfer your bathtime games and songs to the pool. one at a time,as listed in the lesson plan.Remember that
In the pool,introduce water on your own face or on your child will only be able to practice a few of the skills,
a doll or puppet,then try a little on your child’s face. so spend plenty of time playing games or at the Water
Play at the Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47),which
is a fun way to get her accustomed to the water.Always
make sure your child is happy in the pool.If she becomes
distressed and cannot be distracted by a toy or game,
stop.Back off and simply play games or pour water on
less threatening parts of the body than the face and head.
Play is a great way for your child to become
comfortable with having water poured or splashed onto
her.Games and songs (pp48–51) are therefore ideal tools
for water adjustment as well as for learning new skills.
Attention spans are short at these ages,so to keep your
child happy in the pool make sure your lessons flow
well.By following the format of the Activity Circuit (see
pp52–53) your child will practice different skills as she
moves at her own pace from one activity to another.

--- OCR from Page 36 Image 1 ---
1g her
. The
ath.

ou can
pool.
eoron
S face.
j, which
Always
becomes
game,
ater on
nd head.

ed onto
al tools

- Skills.
eep your
flow
cuit (see
as she
ther.

Circuit, also bring familiarity and consistency to your
swimming sessions, so your child will come to look
forward to each successive part of the lesson.

When you start teaching your child to swim, simply
play with her in the water. Then, once you feel she is
ready, introduce the exercises in Stage One (see pp54—69)
one at a time, as listed in the lesson plan. Remember that
your child will only be able to practice a few of the skills,
so spend plenty of time playing games or at the Water

--- Page 37 Text ---
TEACHING BEGINNERS 37
Pouring Station during your lessons.Over time,she will BEGINNERS AGE 12 TO 35 MONTHS
master all the skills in Stage One,and you will be able to If your child is aged between one year and 35 months
complete the entire lesson plan for that stage,and can then start with Beginners:Stage One.Once she can
move on to the next.Amend the lesson plans slightly at perform all the skills given in that section,move on
each session to suit your child’s mood on the day. to Beginners:Stage Two to help her build on the
foundation skills learned in Stage One.Once your
BEGINNERS:WHERE TO START child has acquired all the foundation skills in Stages
All beginners should start the program at Beginners: One and Two and is at least 14 months old,move on
Stage One (pp54–69),regardless of their age,because to the Intermediates chapter.
the general foundation skills that all young swimmers
need are introduced here.Start off slowly,spending time BEGINNERS AGE THREE TO FOUR YEARS
getting your child adjusted to the water using games, If your child is aged between three and four years,
songs,and play,keeping your lessons as fun as possible. you should first refer to the section showing Adaptations
Work through the exercises sequentially at your child’s for Three- to Four-year-old Beginners (pp78–85).This
pace,practicing the skills by following the Stage One section has its own lesson plan that uses many of the
lesson plan (p55). techniques shown in Beginners:Stage One,but—
importantly—it substitutes Stage One submersion skills
BEGINNERS AGE SIX TO 11 MONTHS (pp59–62) with self-submersions (pp80–81),which are
If your child is between six and 11 months old,start with more age-appropriate.Also,the swims in Stage One
Beginners:Stage One (pp54–69).Once she has mastered (pp64–67) are replaced by the techniques on pp82–83.
all the skills given in this section,and turns one year Once your child has successfully mastered all the
old,you can move on to teach her the new skills given self-submersions and swims specifically adapted for
in Beginners:Stage Two (pp70–77).When she has learned three- to four-year-olds and has learned other Stage
the skills in Stage Two and is at least 14 months old, One foundation skills (kicking,jumping,and balance),
move on to the Intermediates chapter (pp86–123). she can move on to Beginners:Stage Two.

--- OCR from Page 37 Image 1 ---
art with
rastered
year

> given
learned
old,

}.

techniques shown in Beginners: Stage One, but—
importantly—it substitutes Stage One submersion skills
(pp59—62) with self-submersions (pp80—8I), which are
more age-appropriate. Also, the swims in Stage One
(pp64—67) are replaced by the techniques on pp82—83.
Once your child has successfully mastered all the
self-submersions and swims specifically adapted for

three- to fouryeat-olds and has learned other Stage
One foundation skills (kicking, jumping, and balance},
she can move on to Beginners: Stage Two.

--- OCR from Page 37 Image 2 ---
lesson plan (p55).

BEGINNERS AGE SIX TO 11 MONTHS

If your child is between six and Il months old, start with
Beginners: Stage One (pp54—69}. Once she has mastered
all the skills given in this section, and turns one year
old, you can move on to teach her the new skills given
in Beginners: Stage Two (pp70—77). When she has learned
the skills in Stage Two and is at least 14 months old,

move on to the Intermediates chapter (pp86—123)}.

techni
import
(pp59-
more ¢
(ppd4-

Onc
self-su
three-
One f
she ca

--- Page 38 Text ---
38 WATER CONFIDENCE
BATHTIME FUN
If your baby enjoys his bathtime,we want to maintain and transfer his love of water
to the pool where play is broader,splashes are bigger,and water is everywhere on
the horizon.For a baby less enchanted by the bath and having water on his face,
going to the pool will get him used to water in a different environment.By using your
baby’s daily bath routine to bring in play that complements swimming,you elevate a
simple daily ritual into an essential learning tool.
As your baby’s view expands beyond the confines of
his bath and you both develop new ways to interact
with water,baths become easier and more pleasurable.
Months of preparation in the bath before beginning
baby swimming will help you and your child move
smoothly from the bathtub to the pool.
First baths—sponge bathing
A baby’s first baths are generally not done in the
bathtub,but by sponge bathing.Early bathtimes should
be loving moments spent interacting with your baby.
A soft tone of voice,gentle singing,and warm water
squeezed from a washcloth or sponge,or poured from
your hands lets your baby know how special your time
with him and the water is.To get your child used to
the water,before using soap,trickle water all over him.
Lay your child back very slightly from vertical,and
with a cupped hand,cradle his head at the neck.With
your other hand,use a wet sponge or washcloth to
gently squeeze water over the top of his scalp so it flows
over his face.If he is startled,reassure him with your
voice and stroke his arms,cheek,and hair to comfort
him.Apply a little water several times each bathtime.
Tub baths—parent and child
Initially,when your baby moves from sponge baths to
the bathtub you should join him.Before you get in,
always test the temperature with your elbow to check

--- Page 39 Text ---
BATHTIME FUN 39
that it is comfortably warm.Cradle your child securely
against you and hold him with one hand.With your SHOWERS
other hand,use a washcloth or sponge to drizzle water
over his head and face.Slowly move him around in the The convenience of showers and the feel of
constantly running water on the skin makes
water,supporting his chin and neck with your hands if
them popular with adults,but what about with
he is on his stomach,or supporting his neck and head
babies? Showers offer water in a playful way that
if he is on his back.
both you and your child can enjoy.However,they
Once your baby is older and has head and neck
don’t allow for time to play with toys the way a
strength,sitting positions will be more interesting for
bath does,so make sure you build some fun
him.It is a good idea to add a selection of colorful
time in.Use a removable shower head to tickle
floating toys to the bathtub that he can play with. the toes,tummy,and fingers,or to drench a
At this point,you can also start using songs to puppet or toy.
encourage water adjustment.First,sing simple songs with
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS
verses that encourage hand and feet movements,such as
(cid:2)Turn on the shower before entering and
“The People on the Bus”and “If You’re Happy and You
carefully check the water temperature before
Know It.”Clap,splash,and kick with your baby to the
exposing your baby to it.
various verses.Then,before using soap or shampoo,sing (cid:2)Adjust the flow from the shower head to a
bath-related rhymes such as “This is the Way We Wash much more gentle pressure for your baby than
our Clothes”(from “Here We Go Round the Mulberry you would use as an adult.
Bush”,but substituting body parts for clothes),and (cid:2)Watch that you don’t over-expose your child’s
dripping small amounts of water over the different parts ears,nose,and mouth to rushing water.
of your baby.Finish by dripping water over the top of
his head,then divert your child’s attention with a toy.
From the age of about three,more elaborate fantasy
Tub baths—older children play is possible in the water.Toys should reflect this
Older,stronger babies can sit up on their own in change,so try adding a mermaid doll and a school of
the bathtub,but never leave a child unattended in the toy fish;a port with boats and cargo;or a troupe
bath,even if he is in only a few inches of water.Sit of puppets to the bath.As you play with your child,
next to the tub so you can watch and interact with develop different scenarios,and make sure you pour
your child.This is a good time to introduce a variety water over the toys and your child as you play.Use
of toys with different uses,such as cups for pouring, the puppets to show your child a new trick of blowing
a waterproof doll you can pour water over,a strainer bubbles,or dip the mermaid’s face into the water and
or colander you can pour water through,and a spray encourage your child to copy her.Children will perform
bottle you can mist water from.Your baby will be actions for toys and puppets that they would never
interested in the movement of water from container easily attempt for their parents.
to container,and should be encouraged to pour water Once your child is at least six months old,enjoys
from the containers onto a doll and himself.This type his time in the bath,and is happy with water trickling
of play in the bathtub is a good precursor to the over his head and face,you can take him for his first
Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47). trip to the pool.

--- Page 40 Text ---
40 WATER CONFIDENCE
FIRST TRIP TO THE POOL
Before your first trip to the pool,get your child used to the water while in the bath
(see Bathtime Fun,pp38–39).Then,when your child is at least six months old and enjoys
playing in the bath,it’s time to transfer your games to the pool.
This is the start of a very exciting journey for both of the pool—not one when she is likely to be tired or
you,so try to make your child’s first experience at the hungry—and don’t rush while you establish a new
pool a happy one that she’ll want to repeat and will routine.For your first few lessons,just think of the
begin looking forward to.Choose an pool as a “big bathtub,”and let her simply play in
optimal time of day to go to the pool and get used to the seemingly vast expanses
of water around her.
On your first trip to the pool,allow your child
plenty of time to get accustomed to the sights,sounds,
and smells of this new and strange environment.
Remember that she is experiencing a novel and very
different location,situation,and routine.Observation
helps to acclimatize a child,so talk her through the
different areas of the pool.Show her the water,toys,and
locker room.Tell her what a good time you and she are
going to have,and how you’re going to play together in
the pool just like you do in the bath.
Don’t pour or trickle any water on your child’s face
during this initial trip.This is purely a chance for your
baby to gain familiarity with the pool and to enjoy the
water.This is a great day for observing your baby and
bonding with her,and it is therefore vital that you take
it slowly and calmly so that she leaves on a positive
note and does not have any worries about her next
trip to the pool.
During your first few sessions in the pool do not
try teaching your child any of the techniques shown
further on in this chapter.Practice instead a safe entry
into the pool so that you are both happy getting into
and out of the water (see pp41–42) and try out a few
of the safe holds (see p43).Allow your baby time to
get used to the water and the new environment of the
pool,practice familiar bathtime activities,some songs
and games (see pp48–51),and let her play and relax.

--- OCR from Page 40 Image 1 ---
pool a happy one that she'll want to repeat and will routine. For your first few lessons, just thi
begin looking forward to. Choose an _ pool as a “big bathtub,’ and let her simply
optimal time of day to go to the pool and get used to the seemingly v

of water around her.

On your first trip to the pool, allow yc
plenty of time to get accustomed to the.
and smells of this new and strange enviro
Remember that she is experiencing a nove
different location, situation, and routine. C
helps to acclimatize a child, so talk her th
different areas of the pool. Show her the |
locker room. Tell her what a good time yc
going to have, and how you're going to p
the pool just like you do in the bath.

Don’t pour or trickle any water on you
during this initial trip. This is purely a cha
baby to gain familiarity with the pool and
water. This is a great day for observing yc
bonding with her, and it is therefore vital
it slowly and calmly so that she leaves on
note and does not have any worries abou
trip to the pool.

During your first few sessions in the pc
try teaching your child any of the technic
further on in this chapter. Practice instead
into the pool so that you are both happy
and out of the water (see pp4l—42) and t
of the safe holds (see p43). Allow your be
get used to the water and the new enviro
pool, practice familiar bathtime activities,
and games (see pp48—51)}, and let her play

--- Page 41 Text ---
FIRST TRIP TO THE POOL 41
SAFE POOL ENTRY
Getting into and out of the pool may seem to be a
straightforward maneuver,but with a baby in your arms
and wet,slippery surfaces to negotiate,you need a plan
that guarantees safety for both you and your child.
Each pool is designed in a different way,but assessing
the safest access from the deck into the water and back
out again will make for pleasurable first and final
moments of your child’s swimming lessons.There are a
number of different ways you can enter the pool with
a baby or young toddler,depending on the access
available,your child’s age,and whether you are on your
own or accompanied by another adult.If you are alone,
do not be afraid to ask for help.
Simple pool entry with two adults
If you are at the pool with a partner,then pool entry is
simplified.While you stay on the deck with your baby,
steadying her in a sitting position at the pool’s edge,your
partner can safely get into the pool.Once he is standing
on the pool floor facing your child,you can ease your
baby into his arms with either a sitting jump or a lift,
before safely entering the pool yourself.Reverse this
procedure to carry out a safe exit from the pool.
Simple pool entry with one adult
If you are on your own with a young baby of manageable
weight,a safe entry can easily be accomplished down a
set of concrete pool steps.With one arm,hold your baby
so that he is straddling your hip at the waist.With your
free hand,firmly grasp the handrail and slowly walk down
the pool steps.If there is no handrail,use your free hand
to help you keep your balance if necessary.

--- OCR from Page 41 Image 1 ---
LdCil POO! Is Gtslstlea Wl d CUTE rCill Wdy, DUL doastasills
the safest access from the deck into the water and back
out again will make for pleasurable first and final
moments of your child’s swimming lessons. There are a
number of different ways you can enter the pool with

a baby or young toddler, depending on the access
available, your child’s age, and whether you are on your
own or accompanied by another adult. If you are alone,

do not be afraid to ask for help.

Simple pool entry with tw
If you are at the pool with a p:
simplified. While you stay on tl
steadying her in a sitting positi
partner can safely get into the
on the pool floor facing your ¢
baby into his arms with either
before safely entering the poo!
procedure to carry out a safe

Simple pool entry with on
If you are on your own with a
weight, a safe entry can easily |
set of concrete pool steps. Wi
so that he is straddling your hi
free hand, firmly grasp the han:
the pool steps. If there is no h:
to help you keep your balance

--- OCR from Page 41 Image 2 ---
POOL ENTRY

y into and out of the pool may seem to be a
‘forward maneuver, but with a baby in your arms
t, slippery surfaces to negotiate, you need a plan
arantees safety for both you and your child.

ol is designed in a different way, but assessing
st access from the deck into the water and back
in will make for pleasurable first and final

ts of your child’s swimming lessons. There are a
- of different ways you can enter the pool with
or young toddler, depending on the access

a, your child’s age, and whether you are on your
accompanied by another adult. If you are alone,

be afraid to ask for help.

Simple pool entry with two adults

If you are at the pool with a partner, then pool entry is
simplified. While you stay on the deck with your baby,
steadying her in a sitting position at the pool’s edge, your

--- Page 42 Text ---
42 WATER CONFIDENCE
Alternate pool entry
Stand with your child next to you by
the edge of the pool,with her on your
dominant side (your right side if you are
right-handed).Carefully lower yourself
to a sitting position,with your knees
bent and your feet in the water.Help
your child to sit next to you in the same
position.Tell her to stay seated while
you get in the pool,and to wait until you
tell her she can jump in.
To enter the pool,place your hands
on the pool edge on either side of your
hips,with your palms facing down and
your fingers facing the water.Push down
on your hands,lock your elbows,lift your
buttocks,and gently glide into the water
so you land standing on the pool floor.
Turn so you are standing in front of your
child.Place your hands under her armpits
so she can jump into your arms.
If you are teaching your child in a pool with no
ENTERING
concrete steps,or if you are alone without the benefit
of a helping hand,practice the alternate pool entry (see THE POOL SAFELY
above).Use this only at the shallow end of the pool
and with older children who can steadily sit and (cid:2)Never jump or slide into a pool with a child in
independently move from a sitting to a standing your arms.
position and back again. (cid:2)If unassisted,try to avoid climbing down a ladder
Throughout this entry,talk to your child so that when holding a child.
she knows what you are doing at each point—that you (cid:2)Always use a handrail when one is available.
will enter the water first,and that it will then be her
(cid:2)Move slowly and securely as you enter and exit
turn to get into the swimming pool.This should stop
the pool;there is no rush.
her from trying to get into the water before you are
(cid:2)If you are alone or worried,ask pool personnel to
ready to catch her.
help you to enter the water safely.
Do not attempt the alternate pool entry if your
physical abilities are compromised in any way,for (cid:2)For the alternate pool entry,choose a depth
marked between 3 and 4 feet (90 and 120 cm).
example by pregnancy,back problems,or wrist,arm,
or shoulder weakness.

--- OCR from Page 42 Image 1 ---
42 WATER CONFIDENCE

If you are teaching your child in a pool with no

concrete steps, or if you are alone without the benefit
of a helping hand, practice the alternate pool entry (see
above}. Use this only at the shallow end of the pool
and with older children who can steadily sit and
independently move from a sitting to a standing
position and back again.

Throughout this entry, talk to your child so that
she knows what you are doing at each point—that you
will enter the water first, and that it will then be her
turn to get into the swimming pool. This should stop
her from trying to get into the water before you are
ready to catch her.

Do not attempt the alternate pool entry if your

Alternate pool entry)
Stand with your child n
the edge of the pool, w
dominant side (your rig
right-handed). Carefully
to a sitting position, wit
bent and your feet in tt
your child to sit next tc
position. Tell her to stay
you get in the pool, anc
tell her she can jump in
To enter the pool, pk
on the pool edge on eit
hips, with your palms fa
your fingers facing the '
on your hands, lock you
buttocks, and gently glic
so you land standing or
Turn so you are standir
child. Place your hands
so she can jump into yc

ENTERING
THE POOL SAF

Never jump or slide into a pool wii

your arms.

If unassisted, try to avoid climbing ¢
when holding a child.

Always use a handrail when one is

Move slowly and securely as you er

the pool; there is no rush.

If you are alone or worried, ask po

help you to enter the water safely.

--- Page 43 Text ---
FIRST TRIP TO THE POOL 43
SAFE HOLDS
The following holds offer you comfortable and safe
options for moving with your child.With all these
holds,make sure your hands are secure but relaxed
(and not clenched),as this will indicate your confidence.
Also talk to your child throughout to reassure her.
The Waltz Hold
This hold provides the most security for your child,
and should be used if he is unsure or clinging to you.It
is the ideal hold for the first few trips to the pool.Move
a child from the Waltz Hold to the Face-to-face Hold
only when you feel him relax in your arms.Hold your
baby up in your arms,slightly to one side of your torso,
so that he is straddling you around the waist to chest
area and is only slightly immersed in the water.
The Face-to-face Hold
You will find that the Face-to-face Hold
provides a great opportunity to
communicate with your baby as you will
have direct eye contact.With your child
facing you,place your hands under her
armpits,with your thumbs facing up.Walk
slowly backward in the water so that her
body floats up and stretches out behind
her.Watch her mouth to ensure that she is
not licking or swallowing any water.If her
mouth is too close to the water,tilt your
wrists upward slightly so that her face
moves away from the surface of the water.
The Pass Hold
This is the most common way to hold a relaxed child,
and you will use this functional hold to perform most
techniques,including kicking drills,passes,and swims.
Hold your baby on your dominant side (your right side if
you are right-handed),so that she is in a near-horizontal
position with her face a few inches above the water.
Your dominant hand should be placed under her far
armpit,with your thumb facing up.Your non-dominant
hand should be under the armpit nearest to you with
your thumb,again,facing up.

--- OCR from Page 43 Image 1 ---
The Waltz Hold

This hold provides the most security for your child,

and should be used if he is unsure or clinging to you. It
is the ideal hold for the first few trips to the pool. Move
a child from the Waltz Hold to the Face-to-face Hold
only when you feel him relax in your arms. Hold your
baby up in your arms, slightly to one side of your torso,
so that he is straddling you around the waist to chest
area and is only slightly immersed in the water.

The Face-to-face Hold

You will find that the Face-to-face Hold
provides a great opportunity to
communicate with your baby as you will
have direct eye contact. With your child
facing you, place your hands under her
armpits, with your thumbs facing up. Walk
slowly backward in the water so that her
body floats up and stretches out behind
her.Watch her mouth to ensure that she is
not licking or swallowing any water. If her
mouth is too close to the water, tilt your
wrists upward slightly so that her face
moves away from the surface of the water.

The Pass Hold
This is the most common way to hold a relaxed child,
and you will use this functional hold to perform most
techniques, including kicking drills, passes, and swims.
Hold your baby on your dominant side (your right side if
you are right-handed), so that she is in a near-horizontal
position with her face a few inches above the water.
Your dominant hand should be placed under her far

--- OCR from Page 43 Image 2 ---
The Face-to-face Hold
You will find that the Face-to-face Hold
provides a great opportunity to

--- OCR from Page 43 Image 3 ---
J child,
1 Most
wims.
ght side if
orizontal
vater.

r far
minant

u with

--- Page 44 Text ---
44 WATER CONFIDENCE
WATER ADJUSTMENT
For the first few lessons,simply play in the pool with your child while he becomes
accustomed to the water.This is a very important part of the progam—if your child is
comfortable with water streaming down his face,and happy in the pool,he will be able
to easily move on to being submerged under the water in later lessons.
doll or puppet,and then over himself.With a more
confident baby,place the sponge over your own head
and let the water drip over your face,reacting gleefully.
Then sponge the water over your baby,or let him do it.
If your child is not comfortable with water being
poured over his face,begin with pouring games (see
pp46–47) until he is more relaxed in the water,then
progress to pouring water on his face.
Using songs
Singing a familiar bathtime song helps make the
transition from tub to pool a smooth one.Try using
“This is the Way We Wash our Clothes”(see p39).
Beginning at the toes,move up the body with the next
verses,pouring the water over the body part relevant to
Slowly conditioning your child to feel water on his the verse you are singing.At the verse for the face,take
eyes,ears,nose,and mouth helps him to gradually 1/4–1/3 of a cup of water,sing,but before pouring,count
adapt to—and later enjoy—the sensation of water “1,2,3,”then pour the water on to the top of the
on his face when he goes underwater.The best way scalp.Immediately re-direct your child’s attention with a
to do this is through play. toy or a different activity.
Using games HELPING FRIGHTENEDCHILDREN
A good way to encourage a child—especially a For a clinging,fearful baby,the pool can seem like a
frightened older child—to accept the idea of water daunting place,but you can change his perception by
flowing over his face is to turn it into a game.Use building up his trust and confidence in you.Think
an absorbent foam ball or sponge to playfully stream about how your child might perceive this unfamiliar
water over your child’s head,or over another object situation and what he may be worried about.Then think
or person.To start with,use only small amounts of of ways to gently help your baby to overcome his fears.
water,then increase the amount over the weeks. Never pull a clinging child off you,but slowly ease him
For a young baby,pour a trickle of water from a toward a new level of comfort through play.Some
sponge over a doll or puppet,then over your child. children are so anxious they won’t get into the pool for
Encourage an older baby to sponge water over the several lessons,but by going slowly you can help.

--- OCR from Page 44 Image 1 ---
comfortable with water streaming down his face, an

to easily move on to being submerged under the w

Slowly conditioning your child to feel water on his

eyes, ears, nose, and mouth helps him to gradually
adapt to—and later enjoy—the sensation of water

eS ee ee i , i. as of i Sy

--- Page 45 Text ---
WATER ADJUSTMENT 45
Start on the steps
USING DISTRACTION
Seated,kneeling,or on his stomach,a child in the low-
TECHNIQUES
water level of the steps is reminded of the comforting
bathtub.Don’t feel like you’re missing out on “the big
When you want to help your child to overcome
pool”—your baby’s face can be submerged from the
any apprehensions or worries,try using these
edge of the steps,he can kick on them,jump from
distraction techniques:
them,and slowly ease himself into the bigger spaces.
(cid:2)throw a ball and ask your child to chase after it
as you take him through the water toward it.Use
Basketball fun
whichever hold he is most comfortable with
The best way to calm a frightened child is to redirect
(cid:2)if there are two of you teaching your child,while
his attention by playing a game—a basketball and
you hold him either play a game of catch with a
floating hoop near the steps are good for this purpose.
floating ball or encourage him to chase after your
With both of you standing by the edge of the pool,let
partner,who should reward him with a toy when he
your child shoot a hoop and cheer him on.Then move
reaches him(see also p56)
down on to the top step and take alternate turns—you
(cid:2)blow bubbles from a jar of toy bubble soap
shoot one then he shoots one.Move gradually down
the steps when he is ready,continuing to take turns (cid:2)give him plenty of toys to play with,such as those
shooting hoops and encouraging him all the time. used in the Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47).

--- OCR from Page 45 Image 1 ---
ne Ni

your child shoot a hoop and cheer him on. Then move
down on to the top step and take alternate turns—you
shoot one then he shoots one. Move gradually down
the steps when he is ready, continuing to take turns

shooting hoops and encouraging him all the time.

partner, who should reward him with a toy when he

reaches him (see also p56)
blow bubbles from a jar of toy bubble soap

give him plenty of toys to play with, such as those
used in the Water Pouring Station (see pp46—47).

--- Page 46 Text ---
46 WATER CONFIDENCE
WATER POURING STATION
Encouraging your child to play with water is a great way to get her used to it,whether
she is uncertain about having water on her face,or a is beginner swimmer who needs
encouragement to go under the water.The Water Pouring Station is great fun,and can
be set up with any pouring items you have available—children’s watering cans,toy
waterwheels,cups,kitchen colanders,small buckets,plastic dolls,and spray misters
are all ideal.Move with your child from one item to the next,both of you
pouring water with the objects,into the objects,and over each other.
Help your child to
pour water over a
doll or puppet—
this encourages
her to pour water
over herself,too
Water Play
Choose objects that
carry different amounts
of water,and from which
water can be emptied in
different ways,so that your
child has plenty of variety
to keep her interested.
Colanders create a
satisfyingly large shower
or waterfall of water

--- OCR from Page 46 Image 1 ---
46 WATER CONFIDENCE

WATER POURING STATION

Encouraging your child to play with water is a great way to get her used to it, whether
she is uncertain about having water on her face, or a is beginner swimmer who needs
encouragement to go under the water. The Water Pouring Station is great fun, and can
be set up with any pouring items you have available—children’s watering cans, toy

waterwheels, cups, kitchen colanders, small buckets, plastic dolls, and spray misters

are all ideal. Move with your child from one item to the next, both of you

pouring water with the objects, into the objects, and over each other.

Help your child to
pour water over a
doll or puppet—
this encourages
her to pour water
over herself, too

Water Play
Choose objects that
carry different amounts
of water, and from which
water can be emptied in
different ways, so that your
child has plenty of variety
to keep her interested.

Colanders create a
satisfyingly large shower
7 or waterfall of water

= : _ 7 —————

--- Page 47 Text ---
WATER POURING STATION 47
WATERADJUSTMENT
Cups can be used to
THROUGHPLAY
pour a sheet of water
over the scalp and
front of the face
The Water Pouring Station should be used every
lesson,whatever your child’s abilities,as it has
Children love watching
many benefits: the water moving as it
powers the waterwheel
(cid:2)pouring from one vessel to another can help
to refine motor skills and coordination
(cid:2)it allows children of different abilities to
explore at their own rate in this self-paced activity
(cid:2)it creates a welcome break from skills that
might be more intimidating or challenging
(cid:2)it allows you to assess when your child is ready
to learn facial submersion.Once a child is
comfortable with water streaming over her face,
a parent can begin introducing facial submersions
and the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61).
Watering cans provide a light
shower of water,and can be
used to pour water over your
child,yourself,or a doll
Bright,colorful toys and balls
are always appealing to
children,and are reminiscent Plastic cupsare easy and funfor your child to use.
of bathtime fun Encourage him to pour water from one cup to another.

--- OCR from Page 47 Image 1 ---
WATER POURING STATION 47

WATER ADJUSTMENT

Cups can be used to

TH ROUGH PLAY pour a sheet of water

over the scalp and

The Water Pouring Station should be used every
lesson, whatever your child’s abilities, as it has

many benefits:

pouring from one vessel to another can help

to refine motor skills and coordination

j

ee, explore at their own rate

j

j

to

might be more intimidating or challenging

comfortable with water streaming over her face,

a parent can begin introducing facial submersions

front of the face

Children love watching
the water moving as it
powers the waterwheel

tt allows children of different abilities to

n this self-paced activity

tt creates a welcome break from skills that

it allows you to assess when your child is ready

earn facial submersion. Once a child Is

and

the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60-61).

--- OCR from Page 47 Image 2 ---
Biase cups are easy and fun for your child to use.
~ Encourage him to pour water from one cup to another.

--- Page 48 Text ---
48 WATER CONFIDENCE
GAMES AND SONGS
Treat your first few trips to the pool simply as extra play sessions,allowing your child
to become accustomed to the new environment and encouraging a love of water by
making the time fun using games and songs.Once you feel your child is ready to start
learning the water-confidence techniques (see pp54–85),games and songs will become
part of her lessons,keeping her stimulated and happy as she progresses,and creating
a positive and fun atmosphere that encourages learning.
Just as children love playing at home and at school,so GAMES TO PLAY WITH YOUR CHILD
they will love singing and playing games in the water. By fully integrating games and songs into your lessons,
Games and songs also support learning on a variety of you will be able to introduce new skills to your baby
fronts as they involve skills such as coordination,logic, in entertaining ways.You can also use them to provide
and memory.As such,they are invaluable learning aids fun breaks for your child after she has tried new or
when you are teaching your child to swim. challenging skills.Repeat the same games and songs
Children’s songs from around the world lend in the bathtub and the pool so that your child is
themselves well to adaptation in the pool.Two of our familiar with them.This will also reinforce the games
favorites are “The People on the Bus”and “If You’re and accompanying movements and encourage water
Happy and You Know It,”but use any song that is confidence in both the pool and the bath.Play the
suitable for the actions involved in water play. games suggested below with your child,but adapt
them to suit her and the pool that you are in.
Motor Boat,Motor Boat
Hold your child under her armpits so that she is in
the Pass Hold (see p43).Spin yourself and your child
around quickly in a circle so that a slight wave is made
by your actions.You can just do the spin,telling your
child that you are going to go fast like a motor boat
does,or even better,you can sing a little song as you
play it,first going slowly,then fast,then running out of
gas and stopping.The song goes:
Motor boat, motor boat go so slow
Motor boat, motor boat go so fast
Motor boat, motor boat, run out of gas!
Children love to be spun round in the water,
making Motor Boat,Motor Boat a very popular game,
even with frightened children.

--- OCR from Page 48 Image 1 ---
Games and songs also support learning on a variety of
fronts as they involve skills such as coordination, logic,
and memory. As such, they are invaluable learning aids
when you are teaching your child to swim.

Children’s songs from around the world lend
themselves well to adaptation in the pool. Two of our
favorites are “The People on the Bus” and “If You're
Happy and You Know It,’ but use any song that is

suitable for the actions involved in water play.

you will be able to introduce new skills to your baby
in entertaining ways. You can also use them to provide
fun breaks for your child after she has tried new or
challenging skills. Repeat the same games and songs

in the bathtub and the pool so that your child is
familiar with them. This will also reinforce the games
and accompanying movements and encourage water
confidence in both the pool and the bath. Play the
games suggested below with your child, but adapt
them to suit her and the pool that you are in.

Motor Boat, Motor Boat

Hold your child under her armpits so that she is in
the Pass Hold (see p43). Spin yourself and your child
around quickly in a circle so that a slight wave is made
by your actions. You can just do the spin, telling your
child that you are going to go fast like a motor boat
does, or even bette, you can sing a little song as you
play it, first going slowly, then fast, then running out of
gas and stopping. The song goes:

Motor boat, motor boat go so slow
Motor boat, motor boat go so fast
Motor boat, motor boat, run out of gas!

— love to be spun round in the water,
making Motor Boat, Motor Boat a very popular game,

og with frightened children.

--- Page 49 Text ---
GAMES AND SONGS 49
Where Did They Go?
If your child is unsure of being in the water or has
been startled when practicing one of the water-
confidence techniques,show her this “magic trick”
to divert her attention.
You will need to fill a bucket with a variety of
colorful floating balls and toys.It is easiest to do this
trick if you have both hands free,so ideally have a
partner in the water to hold your baby.
Show your child the filled bucket,saying,“we’re going
to play a magic trick,”then quickly tip the bucket
upside down into the water trapping all the balls inside
the submerged bucket.Ask your child,“where did they
go?”Then count to three,and tip the bucket right side
up under the water.All the balls will pop to the surface,
and as they do you should shout,“There they are!”
Ask your child to pick up the toys and help her to
put them back in the bucket so you can play again.
Enjoy the look of delight on your child’s face as the
balls pop up out of the water when playing Where Did
TIPS FOR PLAYING GAMES
They Go? Then encourage her to fill up the bucket again.
SUCCESSFULLY
The Pick-a-ball Game
(cid:2)Play the same games—or sing the same songs—at This key game is played every lesson during the Activity
home (whether in the garden or the bathtub).If your Circuit (see pp52–53) and encourages your child to dip,
child is familiar with them already,she is likely to be kick,or swim underwater,depending on her ability—in
confident playing them in the pool. fact,these skills are introduced as part of this game.
(cid:2)Choose songs that match movement with lyrics, Fill a small inflated baby pool with floating balls and
as these help to stimulate several brain functions at toys and secure it at the edge of the pool.You will also
once,helping with the development of gross and fine need a bucket on the side of the pool.Ask your child
motor skills,coordination,and rhythm. to select a toy.Holding your child,stand opposite your
(cid:2)Interact with your baby while you are playing the partner,2–3 feet (60–90 cm) apart.Ask your child to
games.It will keep her alert and interested and she throw the toy to your partner,then pass her to your
will follow the concept of what is going on through partner and the chosen toy.(As your child’s comfort in
your running commentary. the water increases,submerge or swim her toward your
(cid:2)If there is a group of you,circle up for singing. partner using the skills shown on pp58–61 and pp64–67.)
It’s fun to watch faces across from you doing the As she reaches your partner,he should give her the toy
motions and may encourage an attempt at a (a good distraction if she is startled at being submerged)
previously untried skill. and direct her to kick to the pool wall and place the
toy inside the bucket.Repeat with the rest of the toys.

--- OCR from Page 49 Image 1 ---
the water or has
of the water-
his “magic trick”

th a variety of

is easiest to do this
so ideally have a
baby.

t, saying, “were going
/ tip the bucket

ng all the balls inside
hild,“where did they
the bucket right side
‘ill pop to the surface,
“There they are!”

oys and help her to
yu can play again.

C CANMES

Enjoy the look of delight on your child’s face as the

balls pop up out of the water when playing Where Did
They Go? Then encourage her to fill up the bucket again.

--- Page 50 Text ---
50 WATER CONFIDENCE
GROUP GAMES The Pick-a-ball Game is a favorite with children
While playing group games you will see how much your of all ages,and is played several times every lesson as a
key part of the Activity Circuit (see pp52–53).
child benefits from watching his peers,demonstrating
what he can do,or copying them.Group games are a
great way for children to learn both water and social that they encircle a parent-child pair,then raised up
skills while having so much fun they won’t want to stop. again when the main verse is sung.One of the noodle
holders may gently pour water from a watering can
London Bridge Is Falling Down over the children as they pass under the noodle bridge.
You will need two people to hold two foam noodles in
an arch over the water.In a line,parents walk in a large
circle,carrying or swimming their child under the
noodle bridge while singing “London Bridge Is Falling
Down.”If your child is a beginner,carry him above
the water in the Pass Hold (see p43).If your child is
comfortable in the water,you can swim him under the
bridge either above or under the water,depending on
his abilities.On the verse,“Take the key and lock her
up,”the noodles should be dropped to water level so
A very stimulating game,“London Bridge Is Falling
Down”is always exciting for young children,who love the
combination of the words and actions.

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 1 ---
iIdren
on asa

d up
noodle
r can

e bridge.

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 2 ---
SO MMUCH TUN Uey WOrt Wdill LO SLOp.

Falling Down

people to hold two foam noodles in
ater. In a line, parents walk in a large
swimming their child under the

e singing “London Bridge Is Falling
d is a beginner, carry him above

iss Hold (see p43). If your child is
water, you can swim him under the
2 or under the water, depending on
2 verse, “Take the key and lock her
10uld be dropped to water level so

ng game, “London Bridge Is Falling
xciting for young children, who love the
> words and actions.

dsdlil Wier Ue Mdltl vVerse€ Is Ssurlg. We OF THe MOOdIEe
holders may gently pour water from a watering can

over the children as they pass under the noodle bridge.

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 3 ---
GROUP GAMES

While playing group games you will see how much your

child benefits from watching his peers, demonstrating
what he can do, or copying them. Group games are a
great way for children to learn both water and social

skills while having so much fun they won’t want to stop.

Tandtdanr Detter Je [allt une Pyaar

The Pick-a-ball Game is a favorite with children
of all ages, and is played several times every lesson as a
key part of the Activity Circuit (see pp52—53).

that they encircle a parent-child pair, then raised up
again when the main verse is sung. One of the noodle
holders may gently pour water from a watering can

ys es Ok ce  . es ee ns © os ee on

--- Page 51 Text ---
GAMES AND SONGS 51
Run and Jump armpit.While the child runs down the mat have the
If you are able to use a large floating mat,which are group chant,“run,run,run.”When he reaches the end
often available in public pools,then Run and Jump is a of the mat,the spotter should lift him off the mat,
good activity for boosting your child’s confidence and giving him the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61) and
helping him to learn how to balance on a moving place him in the water for a dip or swim to the parent.
surface.However,as your child will perform a standing More experienced swimmers will jump in unassisted.
jump with a held breath it is only suitable for children
who are at the intermediate level (pp86–123). Big Ball Splash
Working in a group,the parents should line up along For this game,three or more parents should stand in a
one of the long sides of the mat with their children circle,holding their children under their armpits so that
and hold on to the mat with a free hand to stabilize it. they are in a vertical position in front of them and
On the opposite side,someone with two free hands facing away from them.Toss a large floating ball into the
should “spot”the child on the mat. circle and tell the children to push the ball to their
The first parent should lift their child onto the mat, friends.The aim is to get the children to extend their
then walk to the end of the mat to wait for their child. arms,reach forward,and push the ball to another child.
The “spotter”should hold the child until the parent is When everyone has had a few turns with their hands,
in the catch position,then the spotter should walk or ask the children to put their feet up and kick or splash
run the child down the mat with one hand under each the ball to each other instead.
Everyone has a great timeduring Big
Ball Splash—so much so that they will
forget that they are being splashed.

--- OCR from Page 51 Image 1 ---
then walk to the end of the mat to wait for their child. arms, reach forward, and push the ball to another child.

The “spotter” should hold the child until the parent is When everyone has had a few turns with their hands,
in the catch position, then the spotter should walk or ask the children to put their feet up and kick or splash
run the child down the mat with one hand under each the ball to each other instead.

Everyone has a great time during Big
Ball Splash—so much so that they will
forget that they are being splashed.

--- Page 52 Text ---
52 WATER CONFIDENCE
THE ACTIVITY CIRCUIT
Make the Activity Circuit a key part of each lesson—it provides a fun and interactive
structure for your child to practice the swimming skills he is learning.The circuit is very
flexible and can be adapted to the pool,situation,age,and skill level of your child,
allowing him to practice different skills at the stations that make up the circuit.
We recommend that you use the Activity Circuit
during every lesson.In it,your child moves around the
circuit from one activity to the next,playing different
games and practicing a wide variety of skills.Its
interactive format and use of toys and learning aids
provides a lively and fun environment and promotes
cognitive,perceptual,and sensory-motor development.
The different stations of the Activity Circuit provide a
set routine for you and your child to follow while
practicing skills.To benefit most from the circuit,you
should devote between 10 and 15 minutes to it in total at
each lesson,spending just a few minutes at each station.
This means that,depending on your child,you should go
around the circuit between three and five times.
Monkey Walk (see p77) Chasing a
parent while monkey walking teaches
children to move along the pool wall
to a safe exit point.
Water Pouring Station(see pp46–47) Here children
can get used to water by pouring it over dolls,toys,their
parents,and themselves.

--- OCR from Page 52 Image 1 ---
52 WATER CONFIDENCE

THE ACTIVITY CIRCUIT

Make the Activity Circuit a key part of each lesson—it provides a fun and interactive

structure for your child to practice the swimming skills he is learning. The circuit is very
flexible and can be adapted to the pool, situation, age, and skill level of your child,

allowing him to practice different skills at the stations that make up the circuit.

We recommend that you use the Activity Circuit

during every lesson. In it, your child moves around the
circuit from one activity to the next, playing different
games and practicing a wide variety of skills. Its
interactive format and use of toys and learning aids
provides a lively and fun environment and promotes
cognitive, perceptual, and sensory-motor development. ® e oe
The different stations of the Activity Circuit provide a bd
set routine for you and your child to follow while
practicing skills. To benefit most from the circuit, you
should devote between 10 and 15 minutes to it in total at
each lesson, spending just a few minutes at each station.
This means that, depending on your child, you should go
around the circuit between three and five times.

Monkey Walk (see p77) Chasing a r,
parent while monkey walking teaches

children to move along the pool wall
to a safe exit point.

1

Ly | a
g it over alls, t

--- OCR from Page 52 Image 2 ---
allowing him to practice different skills at the stations that m:

We recon
during ev
circuit fre
games an
interactive
provides |
cognitive,

The dif
set routin
practicing
should de
each lessc
This mear
around th

Monkey Walk (see p77) Chasing a Ue —_

--- Page 53 Text ---
THE ACTIVITY CIRCUIT 53
During the Activity Circuit your child practices key skills You can adapt the circuit to suit your child’s age and
such as above- and underwater swims and the Breath- skill level,as well as the pool and the equipment you
holding Cue (all as part of the Pick-a-ball Game), have.An eight-month-old beginner would play all the
bringing in new skills as he becomes developmentally games above the water,while an experienced swimmer of
ready (see the lesson plans on the following pages).The three might swim the majority of the course,do standing
Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47) and Pick-a-ball jumps,and dive to find sunken rings.
Game (see p49) are key elements of the Activity Circuit. Each lesson plan outlines the best activities to include
in the Activity Circuit for your child’s age and ability,
although you may need to adapt this plan to suit the
pool you are in.
Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) This game incorporates
passes and swims in a fun way,with children moving
between their parents to retrieve a favorite toy,then
dunking it in a bucket.
Basketball(see p45) is a popular game with children
of all ages—from frightened beginners to experienced
swimmers—they all love shooting hoops in the pool.
Alligator Walk (see p85) Older children can
practice the Alligator Walk,moving along the
steps in a way that encourages the correct
body alignment for swimming.

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 1 ---
During the Activity Circuit your child practices key skills
such as above- and underwater swims and the Breath-
holding Cue (all as part of the Pick-a-ball Game},
bringing in new skills as he becomes developmentally
ready (see the lesson plans on the following pages). The
Water Pouring Station (see pp46—47) and Pick-a-ball
Game (see p49) are key elements of the Activity Circuit.

he
steps in a way that encourages the correct
body alignment for swimming.

THE ACTIVITY CIRCUIT 53

You can adapt the circuit to suit your child’s age and
skill level, as well as the pool and the equipment you
have. An eight-month-old beginner would play all the
games above the water, while an experienced swimmer of
three might swim the majority of the course, do standing
jumps, and dive to find sunken rings.

Each lesson plan outlines the best activities to include
in the Activity Circuit for your child’s age and ability,
although you may need to adapt this plan to suit the
pool you are in.

Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) This game incorporates
passes and swims in a fun way, with children moving
between their parents to retrieve a favorite toy, then
dunking it in a bucket.

Basketball (see p45) is a popular. game with. children
of all ages—from frightened beginners to ‘experienced
swimmers—they all love shooting hoops in the pool.

p85) Older children can
igator Walk, moving along the

an

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 2 ---
Game (see p49) are key elements of the Activity Circuit. Each lesson plan
in the Activity Circ
although you may

pool you are in.

Pick-a-ball Game
passes and swims it

{pe

I between their pare

dunking it in a buck

“> ..

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 3 ---
Basketball (see p45) is a popu
_ of all ages—from frightened be,
swimmers—they all love shoot

tor Walk (see p85) Older childrer
practice the Alligator Walk, moving along 1
steps in a way that encourages the correc
body alignment for swimming.

--- OCR from Page 53 Image 4 ---
pool you are In.

Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) This game incorporates
passes and swims in a fun way, with children moving
between their parents to retrieve a favorite toy, then
dunking it in a bucket.

eet Tee

Basketball (see p45) is a | apo game with children
of all ages—from frightened beginners to’ experienced a
Sims thet all love shooting hoops in the Risks. amg
™~ =

= : ;

a

--- Page 54 Text ---
E
N
O
E
GAT
S
:
s
r
e
n
n
i
g
e
b
)shtnom
xis
ega
muminiM(

--- OCR from Page 54 Image 1 ---
(SHLNOW XIS ADV WNWINIW)
INO ADVIS -SUANNIODAd

--- Page 55 Text ---
STAGE ONE LESSON PLAN 55
STAGE ONE LESSON PLAN
LESSON PLAN
REQUIREMENTS FOR STAGE ONE
Minimum Age: Your child should be at least WARM UP 3–5 minutes
six months old. Practise different holds and kicking. pp43;56
Skill Level: Your child is a beginner.You should
SONG BREAK 3–5 minutes
have played at home in the bath
Sing “The Wheels on the Bus”or a bathtime song. p39
so she is accustomed to the feel
of the water (see Bathtime Fun,
ACTIVITY CIRCUIT 10–12 minutes total pp52–53
pp38–39),and visited and played in
Structure the circuit as shown below.Go around 3–5 times,
the pool to help her adjust to the
spending a few minutes at each “station”before moving on
new environment (see First Trip to
the Pool,pp40–43). to the next.
a) Water Pouring Station pp46–47
b) Jump from the Wall (once per round) p63
All new swimmers should start with this section,whether c) Pick-a-ball Game (at appropriate level–see below) p49
a water-loving six-month-old baby,a boisterous toddler, This game involves passing your child from one parent
or a nervous three-year-old.(Note that there are certain to the other.A series of submersion skills are introduced using
adaptations for three- to four-year-old beginners—see this pass.Over time,as your child adjusts to one submersion
pp78–85.) Once your child is accustomed to playing in skill,move on to the next in the order given below.Note
the bath,and you have introduced her in an unhurried, that some submersions should be practised a maximum of
non-stressful way to the pool,you can begin using the 1–3 times per lesson.As you will be going around the
lesson plan here to structure your 30-minute lessons. circuit 3–5 times,use the Above-water Pass instead in
These will consist of water-adjustment games as well as some circuits so your child isn’t submerged too often.
the foundation swimming skills given in this section. i)Above-water Pass p57
Introduce new skills in the order in which they appear ii)Cheek Dip3–5 times max p58
in this section.Over the days,weeks and months,move iii)Cheek Roll 1–3 times max p59
on to the next skill or skill level only when your child iv) The Breath-holding Cue1–3 times max pp60–61
masters comfortably the skill she has previously learned. v) First Held Underwater Swim1–3 times max pp64–65
vi) First Unaided Underwater Swim3–5 times maxpp66–67
At the end of this stage,your child should be able to
complete the lesson plan at the highest skill level listed.
SONG or GAME BREAK 2–4 minutes
Although the lesson plan is your guideline,always base
Sing or play one or two songs or games. pp48–51
your lessons on your child’s learning ability,mood and
comfort levels.Remember that this programme takes a JUMPS FROM THE WALL 5 minutes total
gentle,child-centred approach.Follow your child’s lead— Jump from the Wall (first or second level depending
if she doesn’t want to do one of the techniques one on ability) 3–4 times max p63
day,don’t push her,simply try another that she is
BALANCE 3–5 minutes p68
familiar with,play a game or spend extra time at the
Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47). TIME TO GO 1 minute p69

--- Page 56 Text ---
56 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
KICKING
TEACHING TIPS
When you witness someone else
Babies are born with a natural dolphin- or froglike kicking reflex
kicking in the pool,point it out to
that usually disappears between six and 12 months and is replaced your child,saying “kick,kick.”
by a rudimentary learned kick with a small up-and-down Praise and reinforce any attempt at
kicking,but do not move your
movement (a “flutter”).Between the end of the reflex kick and
baby’s legs to simulate a kick.
the start of the learned kick there may be no kick at all,and your
Lightly tickling a baby on the arch
child will just glide.At this point,if you want to encourage of the foot may prompt a kick.
your child to kick,these games are a good way to motivate him.
FIRST OPTION SECOND OPTION
Stand in waist- to chest-deep water with your child If your child isn’t eager to chase a toy,he is likely to
in the Pass Hold (see p43).Throw a floating rubber toy love this baby version of tag.Hold your child as for the
or ball 3–4 feet (90–120 cm) ahead of you.Holding first option,while your partner stands just ahead of you
your child above the water,encourage him to go and and encourages your child to “kick your feet and get
get the toy and move him slowly toward it,praising any me.”Your partner should keep walking slightly ahead of
attempts he makes to kick.Once he catches the toy, you and your child until your child is allowed to catch
praise him again. him and get a hug as a reward.

--- OCR from Page 56 Image 1 ---
your child above the water, encourage him to go and
get the toy and move him slowly toward it, praising any
attempts he makes to kick. Once he catches the toy,

praise him again.

and encourages your child to “kick your feet and get
me.” Your partner should keep walking slightly ahead of
you and your child until your child is allowed to catch
him and get a hug as a reward.

--- OCR from Page 56 Image 2 ---
TEACHING TIPS

When you witness someone else
icking in the pool, point it out to
your child, saying “kick, kick.”

Praise and reinforce any attempt at
icking, but do not move your

baby’s legs to simulate a kick.

Lightly tickling a baby on the arch
of the foot may prompt a kick.

»N

ser to chase a toy, he is likely to

n of tag. Hold your child as for the
ur partner stands just ahead of you
- child to “kick your feet and get
ould keep walking slightly ahead of
until your child is allowed to catch

--- Page 57 Text ---
ABOVE-WATER PASS 57
ABOVE-WATER PASS
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
To slowly introduce different pass
The simple action of passing your child to your partner above
positions in a non-threatening,
water builds trust and familiarity.This basic pass will be used and above-water situation.
adapted throughout this chapter,and eventually leads to your To get your child used to
being passed from one adult
child accomplishing an unaided swim between his parents (see
to another.
pp66–67).Establishing a common repeatable pattern helps your
Practice this new skill during the
child assimilate new skills as he will recognize and be reassured by Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) as you
pass your child to your partner.
the familiar action of the above-water pass.
1 Play the Pick-a-ball Game (see
p49) as part of the Activity
Circuit (see pp52–53) and ask your
child to select a favorite toy or ball.
Stand in waist- to chest-deep water
opposite the receiving partner,
2–3 feet (60–90 cm) apart.
Hold your baby in the Pass Hold
(see p43),and toss the toy across
to the receiver.Encourage your
child to get the toy,then move him
forward toward the receiver.Your
baby may kick or he may simply
glide with his head above the water.
2 The receiving partner should have his hands
outstretched as your child approaches him,
ready to catch and reward your child with the toy.
After picking your child up and praising him,he
should turn toward the bucket on the pool wall,
encouraging your child to kick toward it and to
put the toy in the bucket.

--- OCR from Page 57 Image 1 ---
PROSE REESE, CHEE REPECEENE NE UU REET RUN CERO CEMETERY LUE to another

ablishing a common repeatable pattern helps your

Practice this new skill during the

te new skills as he will recognize and be reassured by Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) as you
pass your child to your partner.

ction of the above-water pass.

<-a-ball Game (see
of the Activity
92—53) and ask your
a favorite toy or ball.
to chest-deep water
ceiving partner,

‘© cm) apart.

y in the Pass Hold
‘oss the toy across
Encourage your

> toy, then move him
the receiver. Your
or he may simply
ead above the water.

The receiving partner should have his hands
outstretched as your child approaches him,

ready to catch and reward your child with the toy.

--- OCR from Page 57 Image 2 ---
glide with his head above the water. i=

--- OCR from Page 57 Image 3 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

‘To slowly introduce different pass
positions in a non-threatening,
above-water situation.

To get your child used to
being passed from one adult
to another:

Practice this new skill during the
Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) as you

pass your child to your partner.

--- Page 58 Text ---
58 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
CHEEK DIP
TEACHING TIPS
Once your child is happy with
Gently brushing your child’s cheek against the surface of the
the Above-water Pass (see p57)
water is a great way to expose him to the sensation of water as part of the Pick-a-ball Game,
replace it with the Cheek Dip.
sheeting across his face.After getting him used to the feeling of
If you feel your child resisting in
water on his head in the bathtub (see Bathtime Fun,pp38–39),
any way,stop,and try again after
you will now bring your child’s face into close proximity with the a few more lessons.
pool water in preparation for his first submersion (see opposite).
1 Stand in waist- to chest-deep water and hold your
child in the Pass Hold (see p43).Lift him up 8–10
inches (20–25 cm) so he is in an upright position with
just his legs in the water.Start to bring him slowly across
the front of your body.
2 As you bring him across your body,rotate your brush along the water’s surface.Then lift him and repeat
wrists so he is turned onto one side,and bring the action the other way,gently brushing his opposite
him down to the water.Gently lay the back of his head, ear and cheek along the surface.Once he is comfortable
ear,and the edge of his cheek on the water.Continue with water on his cheek,brush the corner of his mouth
your arm movement across your body and let his face along the water (to prepare for breath-holding skills).

--- OCR from Page 58 Image 1 ---
FN PERE PEN EES FN EN REN RENN EN EAN FO

pool water in preparation for his first submersion (see opposite).

Stand in waist- to chest-deep water and hold your

child in the Pass Hold (see p43). Lift him up 8-10
inches (20—25 cm} so he is in an upright position with
just his legs in the water. Start to bring him slowly across

the front of your body.

——

As you bring him across your body, rotate your brush along the water's surface. Then lift him and repeat

wrists so he is turned onto one side, and bring the action the other way, gently brushing his opposite
him down to the water. Gently lay the back of his head, ear and cheek along the surface. Once he is comfortable
eat, and the edge of his cheek on the water. Continue with water on his cheek, brush the corner of his mouth

your arm movement across your body and let his face along the water (to prepare for breath-holding skills).

--- OCR from Page 58 Image 2 ---
pool water in preparation for his first submersion (see opposite).

Stand in waist- to chest-deep
child in the Pass Hold (see p
inches (20—25 cm) so he is in a

just his legs in the water. Start t
the front of your body.

--- OCR from Page 58 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is happy with
the Above-water Pass (see p57)
as part of the Pick-a-ball Game,
replace tt with the Cheek Dip.

If you feel your child resisting in
any way, stop, and try again after
a few more lessons.

ter and hold your
Lift him up 8—lO
pright position with
ring him slowly across

--- Page 59 Text ---
CHEEK ROLL 59
CHEEK ROLL
TEACHING TIPS
Once your child is comfortable
Once your child is relaxed and comfortable practicing the
with the Cheek Dip (see p58)
Cheek Dip (see opposite),he will be ready for his first true as part of the Pick-a-ball Game,
replace it with the Cheek Roll.
submersion,where his face is briefly placed under the water.
If your child is three or older,
If your baby becomes at all tense or frightened while doing this
practice Facial Submersions (see
action,go back to the Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47) for pp80–81) instead of this skill.
more water adjustment.
1 Stand in waist- to chest-deep water opposite
a receiving partner,3–4 feet (90–120 cm)
apart.Hold your baby in the Pass Hold (see
p43),then lift him up 8–10 inches (20–25 cm)
so that he is in an upright position with just his
legs in the water.Turn your wrists and move
him gently across your front,bringing him down
toward the water so his cheek is in the water.
(To help keep the motion for steps one and two
smooth,say it aloud:“lift,brush,roll,up.”)
2 As he moves across your
front,roll your wrists so that
his face turns to the surface of the
water and his mouth and eyes
briefly enter the water,then lift
him up and out of the water into
the receiver’s hands.The receiver
should re-direct your baby’s
attention with a toy or new activity,
praise him,and check quickly for
any discomfort or coughing.

--- OCR from Page 59 Image 1 ---
2 As he moves acre
front, roll your w
his face turns to the st
water and his mouth a
briefly enter the water,
him up and out of the
the receiver's hands. Th
should re-direct your
attention with a toy or
praise him, and check ¢
any discomfort or cou:

--- OCR from Page 59 Image 2 ---
PIE GLUE Patial QUUTTRCT SIUTIs (ote

tring Station (see pp46-47) for pp80-81) instead of this skill

opposite
0 cm)

d (see
—25 cm)
th just his
move
him down

e water.

ie and two

p.”)

2 As he moves across your
front, roll your wrists so that

his face turns to the surface of the

--- OCR from Page 59 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is comfortable
with the Cheek Dip (see p58)
as part of the Pick-a-ball Game,
replace ft with the Cheek Roll.

If your child is three or older,

practice Facial Submersions (see
pp80-81) instead of this skill.

--- Page 60 Text ---
60 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
THE BREATH-
TEACHING TIPS
HOLDING CUE
Once your child is happy with the
Cheek Roll (see p59) as part of
the Pick-a-ball Game,replace it
Once your baby enjoys having water poured over her head and
with The Breath-holding Cue.At
first,practice just half-second dips.
face and is happy carrying out the Cheek Roll (see p59),it’s time
If your child is three or older,
to teach her a new way to go under the water.The Breath-holding
practice Facial Submersions
Cue is an important technique to learn,but should only be (see pp80–81) instead of this skill.
attempted when your instincts assure you that your child is ready.
1 Stand facing your partner in waist-deep water, cues should have signalled to her that she will be going
3–4 feet (90–120 cm) apart.The receiving parent underwater,but check that she is ready—her eyes
should hold a toy in her hands above the water.Hold should be closed but her mouth may be open.Carry
your child in the Pass Hold (see p43),then take two on gently lowering her so she goes underwater.Note
steps forward while counting aloud “1,2,3.”On “3,”lift that as your child becomes more competent,over the
her 8–10 inches (20–25 cm) up from the water,then weeks,months,and years,you can gradually decrease
lower her toward the water.The lifting and counting the height of the lift to 4 inches (10 cm).

--- OCR from Page 60 Image 2 ---
THE BREATH-
HOLDING CUE

Once your baby enjoys having water poured over her head and
face and is happy carrying out the Cheek Roll (see p59), it’s time
to teach her a new way to go under the water. The Breath-holding

Cue is an important technique to learn, but should only be

TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is happy with the
Cheek Roll (see p59) as part of
the Pick-a-ball Game, replace it
with The Breath-holding Cue. At
first, practice just half-second dips.

If your child is three or older,
practice Facial Submersions
(see pp80-8 1) instead of this skill.

attempted when your instincts assure you that your child is ready.

1 Stand facing your partner in waist-deep water,

3—4 feet ([YO-120 cm) apart. The receiving parent
should hold a toy in her hands above the water. Hold
your child in the Pass Hold (see p43), then take two
steps forward while counting aloud “1, 2, 3.” On “3,” lift
her 8—1O inches (20~—25 cm) up from the water, then
lower her toward the water. The lifting and counting

cues should have signalled to her that she will be going
underwater, but check that she is ready—her eyes
should be closed but her mouth may be open. Carry
on gently lowering her so she goes underwater. Note
that as your child becomes more competent, over the
weeks, months, and years, you can gradually decrease
the height of the lift to 4 inches (10 cm).

--- OCR from Page 60 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is happy with the
Cheek Roll (see p59) as part of
the Pick-a-ball Game, replace it
with The Breath-holding Cue. At
first, practice just half-second dips.

If your child is three or older,

practice Facial Submersions
(see pp80-8 1) instead of this skill.

--- Page 61 Text ---
THE BREATH-HOLDING CUE 61
2 Move your child forward toward
your partner,with her face just
below the surface of the water,taking
another step if necessary.
3 After half a second,bring your
child up above the surface of the
water into the hands of the receiver.The
receiver should check your child for any
coughing,but more importantly,praise
her and divert her attention.Don’t worry
if she looks surprised,but if she cries,
move on to a different activity.Repeat
a maximum of three times during each
lesson in different rounds of the
Activity Circuit (see pp52–53).

--- OCR from Page 61 Image 1 ---
move on to a different activity. Repeat
a maximum of three times during each
lesson in different rounds of the

Activity Circuit (see pp52—53).

--- OCR from Page 61 Image 2 ---
Pre DAREATRI-FIVEUIIN'

Move your child fo
your partner with |
below the surface of the
another step if necessary

3 After half a second
child up above the
water into the hands of
receiver should check yo
coughing, but more impc
her and divert her attent
if she looks surprised, bt
move on to a different a
a maximum of three time
lesson in different round
Activity Circuit (see pp5

--- Page 62 Text ---
62 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
FACE-TO-FACE DIP
TEACHING TIPS
Standing in chest-deep water
In this alternative method of submersion,you dip your child
will help you to comfortably
underwater while she is facing toward you,so she will see your hold your child’s weight,even
though your arms are extended.
happy,approving face as she comes out of the dip,and is
Walk backward at an even and
reassured if this technique startles her.Use the count and lift of
smooth pace throughout.
the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61) to get your child ready to
Check that your baby’s body is
go underwater,submerging her for between half a second and stretching out behind her with her
feet up near the surface.
three seconds depending on her ability and level of comfort.
1 Stand in chest-deep water with your child in the
Face-to-face Hold (see p43).Extend your arms out,
with your elbows slightly bent,to make a space between
you and your child.Walk slowly backward,and count
“1,2,3.”On “3,”lift your child 4–10 inches (10–30 cm)
above the water.Her eyes should close in response to
the lift cue.
2 Continue slowly walking backward as you bring again afterhalf to one second,then distract her with
your child down from the lift and submerge her a toy.As you practice over time,you can gradually
face just under the surface of the water.Bring her up increase the time submerged to three seconds.

--- OCR from Page 62 Image 2 ---
WILTT Yselll CIDA Wo oOLISIILIY UCILy LY Tilda NC d oPakt VOCLWCCIL

you and your child. Walk slowly backward, and count
“1,2, 3.” On “3,” lift your child 4—10 inches (IO—30 cm)
above the water. Her eyes should close in response to
the lift cue.

2 Continue slowly walking backward as you bring again after half to one second, then distract her with

your child down from the lift and submerge her a toy. As you practice over time, you can gradually
face just under the surface of the water. Bring her up increase the time submerged to three seconds.

--- OCR from Page 62 Image 3 ---
1 Star
Face

with yc

you an
“1,2, 3.
above
the lift

--- OCR from Page 62 Image 4 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Standing in chest-deep water

will help you to comfortably

hold your child's weight, even

though your arms are extended.

Walk
smoo

backward at an even and

th pace throughout.

Check that your baby’s body is
stretching out behind her with her

feet up near the surface.

ep water with your child in the

| (see p43). Extend your arms out,

shtly bent, to make a space between

Walk slowly backward, and count
your child 4-10 inches (IO—30 cm)
eyes should close in response to

--- Page 63 Text ---
JUMP FROM THE WALL 63
JUMP FROM THE WALL
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
To teach a touch cue with a verbal
Learning a safe way to jump from the pool wall into the water
cue to initiate the chest-forward
ensures that your child clears the hard concrete surfaces of the lean and jump.
wall and lands safely in the water or in your arms.At first,she To establish a counting protocol so
your child does not leave the wall
will be fully guided by you to jump.Then,as time progresses,
before your count of “3.”
she will begin initiating her own lean toward you after you have
Provide balance for an unsteady
given her a touch cue (moving your hands under her armpits), baby by keeping your hands on
her at all times.
and will jump on her own after you have verbally cued her.
FIRST LEVEL
1 Stand in waist- to chest-deep water,and place
your child in a sitting position on the pool wall
with your hands under her armpits.While you
steady her,count aloud “1,2,3.”On “3,”gently move
your hands forward in a rubbing motion under your
child’s armpits to cue her to jump.Keep your hands
under her armpits as she jumps to you,but do not
pull her hands or wrists to force a jump.
2 As she bends at the waist,allow her to
come forward in a jump so that her
bottom leaves the wall last.Catch her before
her head goes under the water.
SECOND LEVEL
Once your child is comfortable at the first
level,cue her as before,but when she leans
forward,keep your hands slightly away from
her body and catch her in your open hands
as her face splashes the surface of the water.

--- OCR from Page 63 Image 1 ---
As she bends at t
come forward in a
bottom leaves the wall |
her head goes under th

SECOND LEVEL

Once your child is cor
level, cue her as before,
forward, keep your han
her body and catch het
as her face splashes the

--- OCR from Page 63 Image 2 ---
SVINg your Nahds unaer ner armpits}, We OY SSL at pee) ae
her at all times.

1 after you have verbally cued her.

ep water, and place

ition on the pool wall

rmpits. While you

3.” On “3,” gently move
ing motion under your
jump. Keep your hands
ps to you, but do not
yrce a jump.

As she bends at the waist, allow her to

come forward in a jump so that her
bottom leaves the wall last. Catch her before
her head goes under the water.

--- OCR from Page 63 Image 3 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To teach a touch cue with a verbal
cue to initiate the chest-forward
lean and jump.

To establish a counting protocol so
your child does not leave the wall
before your count of "3."

Provide balance for an unsteady
baby by keeping your hands on

her at all times.

--- Page 64 Text ---
64 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
FIRST HELD
TEACHING TIPS
UNDERWATER SWIM
Once your child is comfortable
with the Breath-holding Cue (see
pp60–61) as part of the Pick-a-ball
Once your child is comfortable with brief frontal submersions,is
Game,replace it with the First
competent at practicing the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61), Held Underwater Swim.
If your child is three or older,
and comes out of her dip happy and consistently holding her
practice this swim but adapt it so
breath,you are ready to try the First Held Underwater Swim.This that your child self-submerges after
being given a verbal cue (see p82),
stage will build up your child’s endurance,transforming a brief
then move on to the First Short
half-second dip into first a one-,then a two-,and finally a three- Swim (see pp82–83).
second held submersion with successful breath holding.
FIRST LEVEL
1 Stand in waist- to chest-deep water holding your baby
in the Pass Hold (see p43).You should be facing your
partner,about 4–5 feet (1.2–1.5 m) apart.Give your child
the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61),then move your
baby down toward the water.

--- OCR from Page 64 Image 1 ---
64 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE

FIRST HELD
UNDERWATER SWIM

Once your child is comfortable with brief frontal submersions, is
competent at practicing the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60-6l),
and comes out of her dip happy and consistently holding her
breath, you are ready to try the First Held Underwater Swim. This
stage will build up your child’s endurance, transforming a brief
half-second dip into first a one-, then a two-, and finally a three-

second held submersion with successful breath holding.

FIRST LEVEL

Stand in waist- to chest-deep water holding your baby

in the Pass Hold (see p43). You should be facing your
partner, about 4—5 feet (1.2—1.5 m) apart. Give your child
the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60—6]), then move your
baby down toward the water.

TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is comfortable
with the Breath-holding Cue (see
pp60-6 |) as part of the Pick-a-ball
Game, replace rt with the First
Held Underwater Swim.

if your child is three or older,
practice this swim but adapt it so
that your child self-submerges after
being given a verbal cue (see p82),

then move on to the First Short
Swim (see pp82-83).

--- OCR from Page 64 Image 2 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is comfortable
with the Breath-holding Cue (see
pp60-6 |) as part of the Pick-a-ball
Game, replace rt with the First
Held Underwater Swim.

if your child is three or older,
practice this swim but adapt it so
that your child self-submerges after
being given a verbal cue (see p82),

then move on to the First Short

Swim (see pp82-83).

--- OCR from Page 64 Image 3 ---
competent at practicing the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60-6l),
and comes out of her dip happy and consistently holding her
breath, you are ready to try the First Held Underwater Swim. This
stage will build up your child’s endurance, transforming a brief
half-second dip into first a one-, then a two-, and finally a three-

second held submersion with successful breath holding.

FIRST LEVEL

Stand in waist- to chest-deep water holding your baby

in the Pass Hold (see p43). You should be facing your
partner, about 4—5 feet (1.2—1.5 m) apart. Give your child
the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60—6]), then move your
baby down toward the water.

Held Underwater Swim.

If your child is three or older,
practice this swim but adapt it so
that your child self-submerges after
being given a verbal cue (see p82),
then move on to the First Short

Swim (see pp82-83).

--- Page 65 Text ---
FIRST HELD UNDERWATER SWIM 65
2 As your child’s face is submerged,both you and SECOND LEVEL
the receiver should slowly count “1,2,”as you walk Once your child comfortably accomplishes the first
slowly forward,keeping your baby’s face just below the level,you can gradually increase the time she is held
water’s surface.On “2,”lift her out of the water to and guided underwater by an additional second.Follow
the receiver,who should quickly check that she hasn’t as for the first level,but slowly count “1,2,3”aloud
swallowed any water,before praising her and redirecting before you lift her out to the receiver.Practice this
her attention with a toy.Repeat three times per lesson, three times per lesson,again spread out at intervals
spread out at intervals during the lesson,in different in different rounds of the Activity Circuit.
rounds of the Activity Circuit (see pp52–53),for at
least four lessons before moving on to the second level.

--- OCR from Page 65 Image 1 ---
2 As your child’s face is submerged, both you and
the receiver should slowly count “1, 2,” as you walk
slowly forward, keeping your baby’s face just below the
water’s surface. On “2,” lift her out of the water to

the receiver, who should quickly check that she hasn't
swallowed any water; before praising her and redirecting
her attention with a toy. Repeat three times per lesson,
spread out at intervals during the lesson, in different
rounds of the Activity Circuit (see pp52—53), for at

least four lessons before moving on to the second level.

FIRST HELD UNDERWATER SWIM 65

SECOND LEVEL

Once your child comfortably accomplishes the first
level, you can gradually increase the time she is held
and guided underwater by an additional second. Follow
as for the first level, but slowly count “1, 2, 3” aloud
before you lift her out to the receiver. Practice this
three times per lesson, again spread out at intervals

in different rounds of the Activity Circuit.

--- Page 66 Text ---
66 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
FIRST UNAIDED
TEACHING TIPS
UNDERWATER SWIM
Once your child is comfortable with
the First Held Underwater Swim
(see pp64–65) as part of the Pick-
Weeks of play,practice,and patience are about to culminate in an a-ball Game,replace it with the First
Unaided Underwater Swim.
amazing event—a brief,unaided swim.For the first time,a child
If your child is three or older,
will feel weightless in the water as he swims between his parents,
practice the First Short Swim
experiencing the joy and freedom of movement.This new,flowing (see pp82–83) instead of this skill.
motion stimulates growth on many levels—lung capacity will Ensure you are calm but upbeat.
gradually increase,as will motor skills and spatial awareness.
1 Stand facing your partner in waist- to chest-deep
water,4 feet (1.2 m) apart.Hold your child in the
Pass Hold (see p43),then give him the Breath-holding
Cue (see pp60–61).Check that he is holding his breath,
then slowly move forward,submerging him so his face
is underwater.Release him below the surface,gently
pushing him slightly forward.
2 With the receiver,slowly count aloud “1,2,”from
the moment of submersion.Always make sure that
the amount of time your child is submerged never
exceeds his current readiness.Your child should be in
a horizontal position,and may be kicking or gliding.

--- OCR from Page 66 Image 1 ---
66 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE

ARST UNAIDED TEACHING TIPS
UNDERWATER SWIM Stes

see pp64—65) as part of the Pick

Weeks of play, practice, and patience are about to culminate in an a-ball Game, replace it with the First
Unaided Underwater Swim.

amazing event—a brief, unaided swim. For the first time, a child

f your child is three or older,

will feel weightless in the water as he swims between his parents, facie nenreashareSuim

experiencing the joy and freedom of movement. This new, flowing see pp82-83) instead of this skill.

motion stimulates growth on many levels—lung capacity will Ensure you are calm but upbeat,

gradually increase, as will motor skills and spatial awareness.

| Stand facing your partner in waist- to chest-deep
water, 4 feet (1.2 m) apart. Hold your child in the
Pass Hold (see p43), then give him the Breath-holding
Cue (see pp60—6l). Check that he is holding his breath,
then slowly move forward, submerging him so his face
is underwater. Release him below the surface, gently
pushing him slightly forward.

With the receiver, slowly count aloud “1, 2,’ from

the moment of submersion. Always make sure that
the amount of time your child is submerged never
exceeds his current readiness. Your child should be in
a horizontal position, and may be kicking or gliding.

--- OCR from Page 66 Image 2 ---
a es oe i mm Se

will feel weightless in the water as he swims between his parents,
experiencing the joy and freedom of movement. This new, flowing

motion stimulates growth on many levels—lung capacity will

gradually increase, as will motor skills and spatial awareness.

| Stand facing your partner in waist- to chest-deep
water, 4 feet (1.2 m) apart. Hold your child in the
Pass Hold (see p43), then give him the Breath-holding
Cue (see pp60—6l). Check that he is holding his breath,
then slowly move forward, submerging him so his face
is underwater. Release him below the surface, gently —
pushing him slichtly forward. “7

If your child is three or older,
practice the First Short Swim
(see pp82—83) instead of this skill.

Ensure you are calm but upbeat.

--- OCR from Page 66 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Once your child is comfortable with
the First Held Underwater Swim
see pp64—65) as part of the Pick
a-ball Game, replace it with the First
Unaided Underwater Swim.

f your child is three or older,
practice the First Short Swim
see pp82-83) instead of this skill.

Ensure you are calm but upbeat.

--- Page 67 Text ---
FIRST UNAIDED UNDERWATER SWIM 67
3 On the count of “2,”the receiver
should gently place his hands under
your child’s armpits and lift him out
above the water.The receiver should make
sure your child is comfortable,then praise
him and redirect his attention with a toy
or new activity.This first swim will be just
two seconds long,and you should limit
the number of swims per lesson to
between three and five.Increase the length
of this swim by one second every three
to 10 lessons depending on your child’s
readiness and comfort,until your child
can swim unaided for five seconds.

--- OCR from Page 67 Image 1 ---
3 On the count of “2,” the receiver
should gently place his hands under
your child’s armpits and lift him out
above the water. The receiver should make
sure your child is comfortable, then praise
him and redirect his attention with a toy
or new activity. This first swim will be just
two seconds long, and you should limit
the number of swims per lesson to
between three and five. Increase the length
of this swim by one second every three
to 10 lessons depending on your child’s
readiness and comfort, until your child

can swim unaided for five seconds.
—j,

=.

FIRST UNAIDED UNDERWATER SWIM

67

--- OCR from Page 67 Image 2 ---
e€ receiver
hands under
lim out
should make
e, then praise
1 with a toy
1 will be just
10uld limit
son to

se the length
avery three
our child’s
four child
onds.

FIRST UNAIDED UNDERWATER SWIM

67

--- Page 68 Text ---
68 BEGINNERS: STAGE ONE
BALANCE
SAFETY TIPS
Babies are quick movers,so be
Finding balance in the water is an unique experience,which
ready to steady rapid movements
complements learning to balance on land.For a baby in the that may cause a loss of balance.
water,the dense liquid environment with its altered gravity When your baby is sitting on or in
a floating object,always keep your
envelops him,supports him,and buoys him as he learns to find
hands on him or stay within hand’s
and maintain his center of gravity.“Riding”a noodle is a good reach of him.
way to teach your child to balance as he will repeatedly need to Remember that floating pool toys
are not lifesaving devices,so never
adjust to a bobbing surface beneath him,when moving forward,
leave your child alone in the pool.
changing direction,or going around in circles.
1 Place your child on the middle of a noodle,so that 2 Sing a horse-related song,such as “She’ll be Comin’
he is straddling it and riding it like a horse.You can Round the Mountain.”For the first verse walk
either hold him from the side or sit behind him and your child around in a circle to the left;for the second
hold him around his waist. verse switch and circle to the right.Follow by slowly
spinning your child around 360° twice to the left,then
twice to the right.End with three big jumps in place.

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 1 ---
adjust to a bobbing surface beneath him, when moving forward,

changing direction, or going around in circles.

Place your child on the middle of a noodle, so that

he is straddling it and riding it like a horse. You can
either hold him from the side or sit behind him and
hold him around his waist.

GD TUL HIOGVIT IE UR VIR, ot TROVE

leave your child alone in the pool.

Sing a horse-related song, such as “She'll be Comin’
Round the Mountain.” For the first verse walk
your child around in a circle to the left; for the second

verse switch and circle to the right. Follow by slowly
spinning your child around 360° twice to the left, then

twice to the right. End with three big jumps in place.

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 2 ---
SAFETY TIPS

Babies are quick movers, so be
ready to steady rapid movements
that may cause a loss of balance.

When your baby is sitting on or in
a floating object, always keep your
hands on him or stay within hand's
reach of him.

Remember that floating pool toys
are not lifesaving devices, so never
leave your child alone in the pool.

lated song, such as “She'll be Comin’
untain.” For the first verse walk

| a circle to the left; for the second
Je to the right. Follow by slowly
around 360° twice to the left, then
nd with three big jumps in place.

--- Page 69 Text ---
TIME TO GO 69
TIME TO GO
TEACHING TIPS
Lift your baby smoothly up,lower
Even if your child is tired,she may not want to leave the pool,
her smoothly down,and lift her
especially if she’s had a fun lesson.An exit ritual signals that it’s smoothly back up again as if in one
long connected movement.
time to go,which can make the transition smoother.For our exit
If your child is happy being
ritual we sing “Ring Around the Rosie.”For several weeks,merely
submerged,and you would like
sprinkle water over your child’s head during the last verse.Weeks to submerge with her,hold her so
that she is facing you,lift her,then
later,when your child has fully mastered the Breath-holding Cue
audibly take a breath and briefly
(see pp60–61) and can perform an unaided swim (see pp66–67), submerge together.
she can vertically go under the water at the end of the song.
1 In waist- to chest-deep water, 2 As you sing “...down,”lower 3 After the brief dip,smoothly
hold your child under her her smoothly under the water, lift her up above the surface
armpits,facing away from you. covering her head for about half to of the water,then turn her around
Sing the nursery rhyme “Ring one second.(For several weeks,when to face you and praise her for
Around the Rosie”and walk your child is just a beginner,simply doing so well in the lesson.She
around in a circle to the left.When drizzle water over her head rather will soon come to realize that this
you sing “We all fall...”stand still, than submerging her.) exit ritual signifies the end of the
then lift your child up vertically lesson,and that it is now time to
10–12 inches (25–30 cm). leave the pool.

--- OCR from Page 69 Image 1 ---
(see |

she c

armpit
Sing t
Arour
aroun
you si
then |
10-12

--- OCR from Page 69 Image 2 ---
later, when your child has fully mastered the Breath-

(see pp60-61} and can perform an unaided swim (see

she can vertically go under the water at the end of 1

1 In waist- to chest-deep water,

hold your child under her
armpits, facing away from you.
Sing the nursery rhyme “Ring
Around the Rosie” and walk
around in a circle to the left. When
you sing “We all fall...” stand still,
then lift your child up vertically
10-12 inches (25—30 cm).

2 As you sing “...c
her smoothly ul
covering her head fo!
one second. (For seve
your child is just a b

drizzle water over he!
than submerging her.

--- OCR from Page 69 Image 3 ---
lly go under the water at the end of the song.

hest-deep water, 2 As you sing “...down,” lower

Id under her her smoothly under the water,
nay from you. covering her head for about half to
rhyme “Ring one second. (For several weeks, when
ie” and walk your child is just a beginner, simply

e to the left. When — drizzle water over her head rather
fall...” stand still, than submerging her)

ild up vertically

—30 cm).

3 After the brief dip,
lift her up above th
of the water, then turn hi
to face you and praise he
doing so well in the lessc
will soon come to realize
exit ritual signifies the en
lesson, and that it is now
leave the pool.

--- OCR from Page 69 Image 4 ---
, PRU US jy

he song.

own,” lower

ider the water,

about half to

ral weeks, when
sinner, simply

head rather

AS

3 After the brief dip, smoothly
lift her up above the surface

of the water, then turn her around
to face you and praise her for
doing so well in the lesson. She
will soon come to realize that this
exit ritual signifies the end of the
lesson, and that it is now time to
leave the pool.

--- OCR from Page 69 Image 5 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Lif. your baby smoothly up, lower
her smoothly down, and lift her
smoothly back up again as if in one

ong connected movement.

f your child is happy being
submerged, and you would like

to submerge with her, hold her so
that she is facing you, lift her, then
audibly take a breath and briefly
submerge together.

--- Page 70 Text ---
OW
T
E
GAT
S
:
s
r
e
n
n
i
g
e
b
)RAEY
ENO
EGA
MUMINIM(

--- OCR from Page 70 Image 1 ---
OM L ADVIS -SYdNNilodad

--- Page 71 Text ---
STAGE TWO LESSON PLAN 71
STAGE TWO LESSON PLAN
LESSON PLAN
REQUIREMENTS FOR STAGE TWO
Minimum Age: Your child should be at least WARM UP3–5 minutes
one year old. Practice kicking and chasing a toy or kicking drills. pp56;72
Skill Level: Your child has successfully
SONG BREAK3–5 minutes
completed all the techniques in
Sing “The People on the Bus”or a bathtime song.
stage one (pp54–69).He has
acquired water-adjustment skills, Incorporate bubble blowing into the song. pp39;73
has learned the Breath-holding
ACTIVITY CIRCUIT 10–12 minutes total pp52–53
Cue,can jump from the wall into
Structure the circuit as shown below.Go around the
your arms,and can move through
the water in a brief,unaided swim. circuit 3–5 times per lesson,spending a short time at
each station before moving on to the next.
a)Water Pouring Station pp46–47
As your child develops from a baby into a toddler, b)Monkey Walk p77
he becomes more active and playful in the pool. c)Jump from the Wall (once per round) p63
During this part of the program he strengthens all the d)Pick-a-ball Game p49
foundation skills he has acquired in stage one,but now By this stage your child should have gradually and
you can add new activities such as Kicking Drills (see sequentially learned the submersion skills for stage one.
p72) and Monkey Walk (see p77),which will suit his Continue to submerge your child during the game using the
increased abilities. technique for the First Unaided Underwater Swim (see
As before,work through the exercises in this section pp66–67),but do not repeat this more than 3–5 times
in the order in which they appear,and introduce the per lesson.Use the Above-water Pass (see p57) instead
skills based on your child’s readiness and comfort. to give your child a rest from being submerged.
Children who are relaxed,receptive,and happy in the e)Basketball p45
water may progress very quickly through the skills,
SONG OR GAME BREAK 2–4 minutes
while hesitant or cautious children will need to spend
Sing or play one or two songs or games. pp48–51
more time during each lesson simply playing and at the
Water Pouring Station (see pp46–47).Don’t rush and WALL APPROACHES AND JUMPS 5 minutes total
you will find that over the weeks and months your child Pool Wall Approaches
learns new skills at his own pace. Reaching for and Grabbing the Wall (first or second
For toddlers expressing their independence,do not level depending on ability) 3–4 times max p74
make the pool or the lesson a battleground.Allowing Jumps from the Wall
choice at the Water Pouring Station and during the Jumps from the Wall(first or second level depending
Pick-a-ball Game (see p49) gives your child some on ability) 3–4 times max p63
control over his environment.The playful structure of the
BALANCE 3–5 minutes p68
lesson plan also keeps your child engaged in the pool.
As always,adapt the plan to suit the pool you are in. TIME TO GO1 minute p69

--- Page 72 Text ---
72 BEGINNERS: STAGE TWO
KICKING DRILLS
TEACHINGTIPS
Encourage your child to watch
As your child develops and starts to walk and even run,he
and then imitate other children
will bring increased coordination to bear on his kick—and the and adults as they kick in the
water—he will be motivated by
splashes will get bigger,too.Although some new beginners may
the resulting splashes.
not kick and will simply glide for a while,children in this age
Teach your child to associate the
group generally exhibit a more pronounced learned kick. verbal command “kick,kick”with
a specific physical activity to be
Eventually,with practice,a steady up-and-down kick (a “flutter”)
performed by him.
can be achieved,so try these kicking drills with him.
OPTION FOR YOUNGER CHILDREN
In chest-deep water,stand with your child held facing
away from you and directly in front of you in a
simulated sitting position in the water.Your partner
should kick vigorously in front of both of you.Say the
words “kick,kick”and point to your partner’s splashing
feet.Then encourage your child to repeat what they
have seen:“Make big splashes and get us all wet!”
OPTION FOR OLDER CHILDREN
Sit side-by-side on the pool wall,with your feet in
the water.If your child is nervous,he can start off
sitting on your lap.Demonstrate a kick for your child,
repeating the words “kick,kick,kick”as you perform
the movement,then ask your child to kick with you.

--- OCR from Page 72 Image 1 ---
TIPry Ssuae IO d Wie, CHIQICr il Uills dge Teach your child to associate the
ibit a more pronounced learned kick. verbal command "kick, kick’ with
a specific physical activity to be

tice, a steady up-and-down kick (a “flutter”) santiarcaeels ale

try these kicking drills with him.

UNGER CHILDREN
ind with your child held facing
ectly in front of you in a

on in the water. Your partner

in front of both of you. Say the
point to your partner’s splashing
our child to repeat what they
plashes and get us all wet!”

DER CHILDREN

pool wall, with your feet in
is nervous, he can start off

monstrate a kick for your child,

ick, kick, kick” as you perform

k your child to kick with you.

--- OCR from Page 72 Image 2 ---
Rall De dQCile ved, oU Ly Uileoe RICKI S GUTS WILT TTT.

OPTION FOR YOUNGER CHILDREN

In chest-deep water, stand with your child held facing

--- OCR from Page 72 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Encourage your child to watch
and then imitate other children
and adults as they kick in the
water—he will be motivated by
the resulting splashes.

Teach your child to associate the
verbal command “kick, kick’’ with
a specific physical activity to be

performed by him.

--- Page 73 Text ---
BLOWING BUBBLES 73
BLOWING BUBBLES
TEACHING TIPS
Make sure your child’s face is close
Bubble blowing before the age of five helps children get used
enough to the water so she can
to touching the surface of the water with their lips.It is not bend forward and reach it,but
never push her lips toward the
required for submersion and swimming,but it does help with
water to make her try.
learning breath control and breath holding.This is a good age
A little coughing or sputtering may
to introduce bubble blowing since older babies and toddlers are occur at first.This will stop once
your child can produce a steady
increasingly aware of your mouth movements and will attempt
outward flow of air.
to mimic the sounds you make.
FIRST OPTION
Hold your child in the Face-to-face or Pass Hold (see above the water,then put your mouth in the water and
p43).She should be close enough to the water so she blow bubbles.Let her watch you so she can copy you,
can tip her face forward and touch it.First,blow air then encourage her to blow bubbles with you.
SECOND OPTION
If your child is worried about blowing bubbles
directly into the pool water,either blow bubbles in
your cupped hand filled with water or use a shallow
plastic bowl.Again,let your child watch you blowing
bubbles,then encourage her to copy you.

--- OCR from Page 73 Image 1 ---
FIRST OPTION

Hold your child in the Face-to-face or Pass Hold (see above the water, then put your mouth in the water and
p43}. She should be close enough to the water so she blow bubbles. Let her watch you so she can copy you,
can tip her face forward and touch it. First, blow air then encourage her to blow bubbles with you.

SECOND OPTION
If your child is worried about blowing bubbles
directly into the pool water, either blow bubbles in
your cupped hand filled with water or use a shallow
plastic bowl. Again, let your child watch you blowing

--- OCR from Page 73 Image 2 ---
SECOND O|
If your child is
directly into the
your cupped ha
plastic bowl. Ag
bubbles, then et

--- OCR from Page 73 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Make sure your child's face is close
enough to the water so she can
bend forward and reach it, but
never push her lips toward the
water to make her try.

A little coughing or sputtering may
occur at first. This will stop once
your child can produce a steady
outward flow of air

n put your mouth in the water and
watch you so she can copy you,
to blow bubbles with you.

a

--- Page 74 Text ---
74 BEGINNERS: STAGE TWO
REACHING FOR AND
OBJECTIVES
GRABBING THE WALL
To learn to reach out ahead and
grab the pool wall with the head
above the water.
Learning to reach for and grab the stability of the pool wall sets
To accomplish a sturdy grip on the
an early desirable framework for safety skills learned later in the wall while being held.
program.The skills of reaching and grabbing acquired in these To successfully hold the wall
unaided for five seconds.
two exercises will ultimately develop into the more sophisticated
To reach for and grab the wall
skills of turning around and grabbing the wall for safety,as well
after a cued,held submersion.
as shimmying along the wall or climbing the wall to exit the pool.
FIRST LEVEL
1 Place a toy on the pool wall or in the gutter.With 2 Continue holding your child under the armpits
your child in the Pass Hold (see p43),stand back and reward him with the toy when he grabs the
5–6 feet (1.5–1.8 m) from the wall.Slowly approach wall.Gradually,after several practices,when your
the wall,encouraging your child to kick.When you child is holding the wall firmly,begin slipping first
are 10–12 inches (25–30 cm) from the wall,stop.Ask one hand then the other away until your child is
your child to reach out and grab the wall. holding the wall by himself for five seconds.

--- OCR from Page 74 Image 1 ---
OBJECTIVES

To learn to reach out ahead and
grab the pool wall with the head
above the water

To accomplish a sturdy grip on the
wall while being held.

To successfully hold the wall
unaided for five seconds.

To reach for and grab the wall
after a cued, held submersion.

--- OCR from Page 74 Image 2 ---
PIOST dH. Lie SKIS OF TedCiHils dia SsraDvDils dCQulired Ti tilese lO successTully hold tne wall

: : : : as ided for fi ds,
two exercises will ultimately develop into the more sophisticated a as oF a

. . . To reach for and grab the wall
skills of turning around and grabbing the wall for safety, as well 2

after a cued, held submersion.

as shimmying along the wall or climbing the wall to exit the pool.

FIRST LEVEL

a

Place a toy on the pool wall or in the gutter. With Continue holding your child under the armpits
your child in the Pass Hold (see p43), stand back and reward him with the toy when he grabs the
5-6 feet (1.5-1.8 m) from the wall. Slowly approach wall. Gradually, after several practices, when your
the wall, encouraging your child to kick.When you child is holding the wall firmly, begin slipping first

are 10-12 inches (25-30 cm) from the wall, stop. Ask = one hand then the other away until your child is
your child to reach out and grab the wall. holding the wall by himself for five seconds.

--- Page 75 Text ---
REACHING FOR AND GRABBING THE WALL 75
SECOND LEVEL
Once your child can complete the first level
successfully,and can confidently carry out the
Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61) and First
Unaided Underwater Swim (see pp66–67),you
can submerge her as you approach the wall.
1 Place a toy on the wall.With your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43),stand 5–6 feet
(1.5–1.8 m) from the wall.Give her the Breath-
holding Cue and check that she is ready to
go underwater.Submerge her briefly and propel
her toward the wall,then return her to the
surface 1 foot (30 cm) before the wall.
2 Keeping your hands under your child’s
armpits,ask her to grab the wall.Approach
the wall slowly so that she will not bump her
head on the concrete.Praise her and give her
the toy when she grabs the wall.

--- OCR from Page 75 Image 1 ---
SECOND LEVEL

Once your child can complete the first level
successfully, and can confidently carry out the =
Breath-holding Cue (see pp60—61) and First :
Unaided Underwater Swim (see pp66—67), you
can submerge her as you approach the wall.

Place a toy on the wall. With your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43), stand 5—6 feet
(1.5—1.8 m) from the wall. Give her the Breath- hp

holding Cue and check that she is ready to
go underwater. Submerge her briefly and propel
her toward the wall, then return her to the
surface | foot (30 cm) before the wall.

Keeping your hands under your child’s

armpits, ask her to grab the wall. Approach
the wall slowly so that she will not bump her
head on the concrete. Praise her and give her
the toy when she grabs the wall.

--- OCR from Page 75 Image 2 ---
REACHING FOR AND GRABBING THE WALL 75

SECOND LEVEL

Once your child can complete the first level
successfully, and can confidently carry out the
Breath-holding Cue (see pp60—61) and First
Unaided Underwater Swim (see pp66—67), you
can submerge her as you approach the wall.

Place a toy on the wall. With your child in

the Pass Hold (see p43), stand 5—6 feet
(1.5—1.8 m) from the wall. Give her the Breath-
holding Cue and check that she is ready to
go underwater. Submerge her briefly and propel |
her toward the wall, then return her to the
surface | foot (30 cm) before the wall.

--- Page 76 Text ---
76 BEGINNERS: STAGE TWO
LEARNING TO WAIT
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
To establish important safety rules
Teaching your child to wait for a cue from an adult before
from an early age and teach your
entering a body of water is a vital safety skill.Along with the child to enter the pool only with
your permission.
safe pool entries (see pp41–42) and sitting jumps from the wall
Use this technique every time you
(see p63),learning to wait is an important skill for your child
practice jumping from the wall.
to learn,both in and out of the pool.
FIRST OPTION
Standing in waist-deep water,place your child on the
wall so he is ready for a jump.If he begins to lean or
jump prematurely,put your right hand flat on his chest
and your left hand under his right armpit.Tell him to
“wait until I have counted to 3.”Count to cue the
jump,keeping your hands in the same position while
you count “1,2.”As you reach “3,”move your right
hand to under his left armpit,cueing him to jump.
Catch him as per the instructions for jumping from
the wall (see p63).
SECOND OPTION
Once a child is walking and running on her own,
enforcing safety rules will keep her away from
immediate danger.Before entering the pool area
with your child,hold her hand and tell her to
walk with you.If she begins to run toward the
pool by herself,firmly call to her to “wait.”
Walk up to her quickly,hold her hand,and tell
her,“Do not go in unless I am with you.”Do
not discipline your child,but firmly tell her she
must not go in on her own.

--- OCR from Page 76 Image 1 ---
aA

“OND OPTION

‘ea child is walking and running on her own,
cing safety rules will keep her away from
lediate danger. Before entering the pool area
. your child, hold her hand and tell her to
with you. If she begins to run toward the
| by herself firmly call to her to “wait.”

k up to her quickly, hold her hand, and tell
“Do not go in unless | am with you.” Do
discipline your child, but firmly tell her she
t not go in on her own.

and your left hand under his right armpit. tell nim to
“wait until | have counted to 3.” Count to cue the
jump, keeping your hands in the same position while
you count “1, 2.” As you reach “3,” move your right
hand to under his left armpit, cueing him to jump.
Catch him as per the instructions for jumping from
the wall (see p63).

--- OCR from Page 76 Image 2 ---
(see p63), learning to wait is an important skill for your child

to learn, both in and out of the pool.

FIRST C

Standing

wall so he

jump pret

and your

q “wait unt

jump, kee

J } you coun

hand to t
Catch hin
the wall (:

SECOND OPTION

Once a child is walking and running on her own,

a a a ee, Ce . | i a Ae

--- OCR from Page 76 Image 3 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To establish important safety rules
from an early age and teach your
child to enter the pool only with
your permission.

Use this technique every time you
practice jumping from the wall.

ep water, place your child on the
or a jump. If he begins to lean or
It your right hand flat on his chest
Inder his right armpit. Tell him to
unted to 3.” Count to cue the
hands in the same position while
you reach “3,” move your right

ft armpit, cueing him to jump.

e instructions for jumping from

--- Page 77 Text ---
MONKEY WALK 77
MONKEY WALK
TEACHING TIPS
Place a toy 4 feet (1.2 m) away
Rob imagined a small monkey edging along a branch when he
from your child in the gutter.
named this hand-by-hand shimmy.This drill is a vital part of early Reward him with the toy once
he has reached it by himself.
safety skills since it teaches a child to move safely in the pool
Practice as part of the Activity
alone,even if he can’t swim.Once a child can grab the wall,he
Circuit (see pp52–53).
can shimmy over to the nearest ladder or steps and exit the pool.
FIRST LEVEL
Position your child so that he is firmly gripping the
pool gutter or wall,and place a toy in the gutter or
on the wall 4 feet (1.2 m) away from you.Stand behind
him with your hands on top of his.Slide his right hand
along the gutter,then slide his left hand toward his
right hand so they meet.As you move his hands say
aloud,“slide… together.”Repeat this action as you
move along the wall until your child reaches the toy.
SECOND LEVEL
Once your child has learned how to monkey walk with in front of her,with both of you gripping the gutter.
your hands guiding hers,she can try it on her own. Encourage her to chase you as you monkey walk ahead
Stand alongside your child,about 1–2 feet (30–60 cm) of her.Once she catches you,give her a big hug.

--- OCR from Page 77 Image 1 ---
SECOND LEVEL

Once your child has learned how
your hands guiding hers, she can
Stand alongside your child, about

--- OCR from Page 77 Image 2 ---
right hand so they meet. As you move his hands say
aloud, “slide... together.” Repeat this action as you
move along the wall until your child reaches the toy.

SECOND LEVEL

Once your child has learned how to monkey walk with in front of hey with both of you gripping the gutter.

your hands guiding hers, she can try it on her own. Encourage her to chase you as you monkey walk ahead
Stand alongside your child, about I|—2 feet (30-60 cm) of her. Once she catches you, give her a big hug.

--- OCR from Page 77 Image 3 ---
FIRST |
Position
pool gut
on the
him with
along thi
right har
aloud, “s|
move alc

--- OCR from Page 77 Image 4 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Place a toy 4 feet (1.2 m) away
from your child in the gutter
Reward him with the toy once
he has reached it by himself.

Practice as part of the Activity
Circuit (see pp52-53).

o that he is firmly gripping the
and place a toy in the gutter or

2 m) away from you. Stand behind
; on top of his. Slide his right hand
n slide his left hand toward his
neet. AS you move his hands say
her.” Repeat this action as you

until your child reaches the toy.

--- Page 78 Text ---
r
o
f
s
n
o
i
tat
p
ad
a
srennigeb
dlo-RAEY-ruof
ot
-EERHT

--- OCR from Page 78 Image 1 ---
SYANNIDAG C10- WIA UNOS OL NHL

YOd SNOLLVLdVaV

--- Page 79 Text ---
ADAPTED LESSON PLAN 79
ADAPTED LESSON PLAN
LESSON PLAN
REQUIREMENTS FOR STAGE THREE
Minimum Age: Your child should be at least WARM UP3 minutes
three years old. Practice kicking and chasing a toy or kicking drills. pp56;72
Skill Level: Your child is a beginner.You should
SONG BREAK3–5 minutes
already have played at home in the
Sing “The Wheels on the Bus”or a bathtime song. p39
bath so he is accustomed to the
feel of water (see Bathtime Fun,
ACTIVITY CIRCUIT10–12 minutes total pp52–53
pp38–39),and visited and played
Structure the circuit as shown below.Go around 3–5 times.
in the pool to help him adjust to
the new environment (see First a)Water Pouring Station pp46–47
Trip to the Pool,pp40–43). b)Monkey Walk p77
c)Pick-a-ball Game(at appropriate level–see below) p49
This game involves passing your child between parents while
This section is specifically adapted for beginners over the introducing submersion skills.As your child adjusts to one skill,
age of three.Unlike younger counterparts,they should be move on to the next in the order given.Use the Above-water
full participants in the “when”and “how”of submersions, Pass for some circuits so your child isn’t submerged too often.
practising self-submersions rather than being submerged Only practice the swims once your child happily self-submerges.
by their parent.To address the needs of the eager,as well i)Above-water Pass p57
as the frightened,beginner,we have included a number of ii)Cheek Dip3–5 times max p58
games that allow your child to practise self-submersion, iii)Facial self-submersion (adapted for open water)see left
so he learns to put his face in the water willingly. iv)First Held Underwater Swim with self-submersion
Follow the lesson plan here to guide you through the (see p82) 2–4 times max pp64–65
techniques in Stage One and this section,which substitutes v)First Short Swim3–4 times max pp82–83
self-initiated submersions for parent-initiated ones.Note d) Basketball p45
that you should only practise the First Held Underwater e) Facial Submersions2–4 times max pp80–81
Swim (see pp64–65) or First Short Swim (see pp82–83) f) Alligator Walk p85
g) Standing Step JumporJump from the Wall pp84;63
once your child can self-submerge confidently at the pool
steps (see pp80–81),then when held in the open water.To
SONG or GAME BREAK2–4 minutes pp48–51
adapt pp80–81 for open water (for a facial self-submersion
during the pass in Pick-a-ball Game) the sending parent WALLAPPROACHESANDJUMPS 5 minutes total
holds the child opposite the receiving parent,30–46cm a)Reaching for and Grabbing the Wall (first level,or
(12–18 inches) away.Use techniques from level 1,3 or 4, second level with self-submersion,depending on ability)
encouraging your child to briefly dip his own face in the 3 times max p74
water,then transfer him to the receiving parent who b)Jump from the Wall (first or second level depending
praises him and re-directs his attention to finish the game. on ability) 3–4 times max p63
Once your child has mastered the skills in this stage,
BALANCE3–5 minutes p68
move on to Stage Two,again substituting self-initiated
submersions for parent-initiated ones. TIME TO GO1 minute p69

--- Page 80 Text ---
80 ADAPTATIONS FOR THREE- TO FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS
FACIAL SUBMERSIONS
TEACHING TIPS
Never force your child’s head
You need to approach the technique of facial submersion for
under the water.
three- to four-year-olds in a different way than for younger
Self-initiated submersion may
children.At these ages,children become full participants in the come excitedly the first day or it
may take weeks of practice—your
“when”and “how”of submerging their faces in the water.By
child may also put her face in the
using playful games,your child will initiate this defining moment water one day and not want to
the next.Don’t worry about these
and submerge her face herself.Her face will beam with pride and
hiccups—go at your child’s pace.
a sense of accomplishment in conquering the unknown.
FIRST LEVEL SECOND LEVEL
With your child sitting on a shallow pool step if she is Stand in chest-deep water with your hands gripping
nervous,hold her in the Face-to-face Hold (see p43) the pool wall.Ask your child to hold on to the wall
with your arms outstretched and your elbows slightly next to you.Tell her that you are going to play a game
bent.Play a game of “quick draw”—see who can dip of peekaboo Pop your head under the water,then come
their face in and out of the water fastest.Start by up and quickly say,“Peekaboo.Your turn!”You may need
dipping your eyes,nose,and mouth in and out of the to go up and down two or three times before she
water,then ask her to copy you and see if she can do copies you,and at first she may just dip her chin in
it as quickly as you. the water and not her whole face.

--- OCR from Page 80 Image 1 ---
EE OEE EIS ES hiccups—go at your child's pace.

the unknown.

———
~

a

—

SECOND LEVEL

if she is Stand in chest-deep water with your hands gripping

--- OCR from Page 80 Image 2 ---
FIRST LEVEL SECOND LEVEL

With your child sitting on a shallow pool step if she is Stand in chest-deep wat

--- OCR from Page 80 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Never force your child's head
under the water.

Self-initiated submersion may
come excitedly the first day or it
may take weeks of practice—your
child may also put her face in the
water one day and not want to
the next. Don’t worry about these
hiccups—go at your child's pace.

--- Page 81 Text ---
FACIAL SUBMERSIONS 81
THIRD LEVEL
Sit facing your child on a shallow pool step.
Take your finger and pretend to “paint”the
colors of the rainbow one at a time on your
child’s forehead.Ask her to tell you which
color comes next.Now ask her to “wash
off”the imaginary paint,and encourage her
to lean forward and dip all or part of her
face into the water.Repeat a few times.
FOURTH LEVEL
Hide some colorful “treasure”on a shallow pool step,
such as plastic weighted toys,coins,costume jewelry,
or diving rings.With both you and your child wearing
goggles,put your face in the water first to look at the
sunken objects.Then encourage your child to come and
dip her face in and look at the treasure with you.

--- OCR from Page 81 Image 1 ---
FACIAL SUBMERSIONS

THIRD LEVEL

Sit facing your child on a shallow pool st

Take your finger and pretend to “paint” t!
colors of the rainbow one at a time on y
child’s forehead. Ask her to tell you whicl
color comes next. Now ask her to “wash
off” the imaginary paint, and encourage h
to lean forward and dip all or part of her
face into the water. Repeat a few times.

FOURTH LEVEL
Hide some colorful “treasure” on a shallow pool step,
such as plastic weighted toys, coins, costume jewelry,

or diving rings. With both you and your child wearing
goggles, put your face in the water first to look at the
sunken objects. Then encourage your child to come and
dip her face in and look at the treasure with you.

--- OCR from Page 81 Image 2 ---
FOURTH LEVEL

Hide some colorful “treasure” on a shallow pool step,

such as plastic weighted toys, coins, costume jewelry,

or diving rings. With both you and your child wearing
goggles, put your face in the water first to look at the
sunken objects. Then encourage your child to come and
dip her face in and look at the treasure with you.

--- OCR from Page 81 Image 3 ---
Take your finger and pretend to “paint” the

colors of the rainbow one at a time on your
child’s forehead. Ask her to tell you which
color comes next. Now ask her to “wash
off” the imaginary paint, and encourage her
to lean forward and dip all or part of her
face into the water. Repeat a few times.

llow pool step,
stume jewelry,
ur child wearing
st to look at the
hild to come and
e with you.

--- Page 82 Text ---
82 ADAPTATIONS FOR THREE- TO FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS
FIRST SHORT SWIM
OBJECTIVES
To provide a secure,trustworthy
Your child’s first unaided swim is the culmination of months
base from which—and toward
of practice—this is one of life’s big moments! Before you try which—your child can swim.
this technique,ensure your child confidently self-submerges as To maintain and increase your
child’s confidence in the water.His
shown on pp80–81.Next,practice both levels of the First Held
self-esteem will grow as he realizes
Underwater Swim (see pp64–65),but with your child choosing he doesn’t need you to give him a
cue for submersion.
to submerge his own face in the water by allowing you to count
To help your child to hold his
him in instead of being given a lift cue.This means that,before he
breath,self-submerge,and swim
unaided for two seconds.
learns the First Short Swim,he will be able to hold his breath and
go underwater without needing you to initiate the submersion.
1 Standing in chest-deep water and facing your partner,about 2–3 feet
(60–90 cm) apart,hold your child in the Pass Hold (see p43).Ask
your child to stretch out his hands toward your partner,with his palms
facing downward.Tell him,“When you put your face in,I’m going to send
you over to [the receiver].Keep your face in until you touch her hands,
then come up and say ‘hello!’”Reach your child toward the receiver’s
outstretched hands (her palms should be facing upward) and let him touch
them to show him how close her hands are.

--- OCR from Page 82 Image 1 ---
82 ADAPTATIONS FOR THREE- TO FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS

FIRST SHORT SWIM OBJECTIVES

To provide a secure, trustworthy

Your child’s first unaided swim is the culmination of months ;
base from which—and toward

of practice—this is one of life’s big moments! Before you try which—your child can swim.

this technique, ensure your child confidently self-submerges as To maintain and increase your
child's confidence in the water His

shown on pp80-8I. Next, practice both levels of the First Held

self-esteem will grow as he realizes

Underwater Swim (see pp64-65), but with your child choosing he doesn't need you to give him a
cue for submersion.

to submerge his own face in the water by allowing you to count
To help your child to hold his

him in instead of being given a lift cue. This means that, before he breath, self-submerge, and swim

unaided for two seconds.

learns the First Short Swim, he will be able to hold his breath and

go underwater without needing you to initiate the submersion.

4
viglig | s

(60-90 aa} beers old your child 1 the Pass Hold (see p43). Ask
your child to stretch out his hands toward your partner, with his palms

facing downward. Tell him,“When you put your face in, I’m going to send
you over to [the receiver]. Keep your face in until you touch her hands,
then come up and say ‘hello!’”” Reach your child toward the receiver's
outstretched hands (her palms should be facing upward) and let him touch
them to show him how close her hands are.

--- OCR from Page 82 Image 2 ---
OBJECTIVES

To provide a secure, trustworthy
base from which—and toward

which—your child can swim.

To maintain and increase your

child's confidence in the water His
self-esteem will grow as he realizes
he doesn’t need you to give him a

cue for submersion.

To help your child to hold his
breath, self-submerge, and swim

unaided for two seconds.

--- Page 83 Text ---
FIRST SHORT SWIM 83
2 Ask your child if he is ready
to go underwater,then as he
holds his breath and submerges,
push him slightly forward and release
your hands from under his armpits.
As he is submerged,count “1,2.”The
receiver lets your child reach out
and touch her hands,then catches
your child’s hands in hers.Your child
should either lift his own head up
and say “hello”to the receiver after
this 2-second swim,or be lifted up.
Praise your child.

--- OCR from Page 83 Image 1 ---
FIRST SHORT SWIM 83

2 Ask your child if he is ready
to go underwater, then as he

holds his breath and submerges,
push him slightly forward and release
your hands from under his armpits.
As he is submerged, count “1, 2.” The
receiver lets your child reach out
and touch her hands, then catches
your child’s hands in hers. Your child
should either lift his own head up
and say “hello” to the receiver after
this 2-second swim, or be lifted up.
Praise your child.

--- OCR from Page 83 Image 2 ---
FIRST SHORT SWIM 83

2 Ask your child if he is ready
to go underwater, then as he
holds his breath and submerges,
push him slightly forward and release
your hands from under his armpits.
As he is submerged, count “1, 2.” The
receiver lets your child reach out
and touch her hands, then catches
your child’s hands in hers. Your child
should either lift his own head up
and say “hello” to the receiver after
this 2-second swim, or be lifted up.
Praise your child.

--- Page 84 Text ---
84 ADAPTATIONS FOR THREE- TO FOUR-YEAR-OLD BEGINNERS
STANDING STEP JUMP
TEACHING TIPS
Stay very close to your child at
There is often a wonderful exuberance when children jump into
first,as she may perceive the space
the water,and they love to repeat this activity again and again. between you to be enormous.
Where you get your child to perform this jump is important.If The closer you stand in front of
your child,the better the lean,and
you position her in waist- to chest-deep water,her face is already
the better the body position for
close to the surface and she needs only to lean forward to reach your child’s jump.
you.While some children will quickly turn this small jump into a Never force your child to jump—
wait until she is ready.
leap,others will need time before they even lean toward you.
2 Now,help her to get up to the
top step.Guide her to stand
on the bottom step,or the middle
step if the bottom step is too deep.
Position her so she is facing away
from you and toward the steps.
Ask her to put her arms out and,
1 Help your child stand on a pool step so that she is in waist- to chest- on your count of “1,2,3,”lean
deep water.Stand directly in front of her on the pool floor.Ask her to toward the top step and reach for
stand on the edge of the step and curl her toes over the edge.Brushing it with her hands.Once she has
your hands under her armpits,count “1,2,3,”then encourage her to bend her hands firmly on the top step,
her knees,lean over,push herself off the step,and jump forward toward she can climb up the steps.Stand
you.Keep your hands close to her as she jumps toward you,and catch her behind her so that you can help
while her face is still above the water. her if she needs it.

--- OCR from Page 84 Image 1 ---
close to the surface and she needs only to lean forward to reach

you. While some children will quickly turn this small jump into a

leap, others will need time before they even lean toward you.

your child's jump.

Never force your child to jut
wait until she is ready.

1 Help your child stand on a pool step so that she is in waist- to chest-
deep water. Stand directly in front of her on the pool floor Ask her to
stand on the edge of the step and curl her toes over the edge. Brushing
your hands under her armpits, count “, 2, 3,’ then encourage her to bend
her knees, lean over, push herself off the step, and jump forward toward
you. Keep your hands close to her as she jumps toward you, and catch her
while her face is still above the water.

2 Now, help her to get u
top step. Guide her to
on the bottom step, or the
step if the bottom step is tc
Position her so she is facing
from you and toward the st
Ask her to put her arms ou
on your count of “1, 2, 3,” le
toward the top step and rea
it with her hands. Once she
her hands firmly on the top
she can climb up the steps. ‘
behind her so that you can
her if she needs it.

--- OCR from Page 84 Image 2 ---
VU Sel YUU CITA GU VOTIVE CIO JUTE! lo TIPU Lait. ab USS SII Y/N) Se UU Ue US Ne

your child, the better the lean, and

ition her in waist- to chest-deep water, her face is already ings eaiine xa rertiion (a
the surface and she needs only to lean forward to reach your child's jump.
ile some children will quickly turn this small jump into a Never force your child to jump—

wait until she is ready.

ers will need time before they even lean toward you.

Now, help her to get up to the
top step. Guide her to stand
on the bottom step, or the middle

--- OCR from Page 84 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Stay very close to your child at
first, as she may perceive the space
between you to be enormous.

The closer you stand in front of
your child, the better the lean, and
the better the body position for

your child's jump.

Never force your child to jump—

wait until she is ready.

--- Page 85 Text ---
ALLIGATOR WALK 85
ALLIGATOR WALK
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
To help promote a good,flat,
This fun exercise was inspired by alligators stretching out flat
elongated body position and an
while sunning themselves in shallow water.In this game,you ask up-and-down kick.
your child to lie on the shallow steps of the pool and act like an If you want to get your child used
to having his face in the water,ask
alligator.The position allows him to experience the correct
him to blow bubbles as well.
horizontal body alignment for swimming,and to extend his legs.
Practice as part of the Activity
Plus,he will become used to having his face near the water,which Circuit (see pp52–53).
helps him to become even more accustomed to submersions.
FIRST LEVEL SECOND LEVEL
Help your child lie flat on his stomach at one Once your child is comfortable with the first level,you
end of the shallow pool step.Stand at the other end can ask him to blow bubbles or make alligator-like
of the step and ask him to crawl toward you on his grunts and growls as he kicks and moves along the
stomach,using his arms to pull himself forward. pool step.All of these activities will help him to get
Now ask him to also kick his feet.The step should used to the feel of water on his face,and will make this
stop his knees from bending fully,which will help to exercise seem more like a fun game.Eventually,he will
promote a more efficient kick. be happy to put his entire face in the water.

--- OCR from Page 85 Image 1 ---
ALLIGATOR WALK OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To help promote a good, flat,

This fun exercise was inspired by alligators stretching out flat >
elongated body position and an

while sunning themselves in shallow water. In this game, you ask up-and-down kick.

your child to lie on the shallow steps of the pool and act like an If you want to get your child used

. we . . to having his face in the water, ask
alligator. The position allows him to experience the correct
him to blow bubbles as well.

horizontal body alignment for swimming, and to extend his legs. aeciceeeas eee

Plus, he will become used to having his face near the water, which Circuit (see pp52—53).

helps him to become even more accustomed to submersions.

FIRST LEVEL SECOND LEVEL

Help your child lie flat on his stomach at one Once your child ‘is comfortable with the first level, you
end of the shallow pool step. Stand at the other end can ask him to blow bubbles or make alligatorlike

of the step and ask him to crawl toward you on his grunts and: growls as he kicks and moves along the
stomach, using his arms to pull himself forward. pool step. All of these activities will help him to get
Now ask him to also kick his feet. The step should used to the feel of water on his face, and will make this
stop his knees from bending fully, which will help to exercise seem more like a fun game. Eventually, he will

promote a more efficient kick. be happy to put his entire face in the water.

--- OCR from Page 85 Image 2 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To help promote a good, flat,
elongated body position and an
up-and-down kick.

If you want to get your child used
to having his face in the water, ask
him to blow bubbles as well.

Practice as part of the Activity
Circuit (see pp52-53).

--- Page 87 Text ---
S W I M M I N G
U N A I D E D
Congratulations! Your child can now successfully submerge on cue,
comfortably swim for five seconds while holding her breath, steadily kick,
confidently propel herself forward, and happily emerge from her swim
without having swallowed any water.As a learning team, you and your child
are now ready to add new, more complex skills to your repertoire, such as
turning around underwater, floating, and diving for rings.As always, our
goal in this chapter is a relaxed, happy child who is enjoying the process of
learning to swim. Progressing at your child’s pace and making each lesson
playful and fun will result in a child who is truly at home in the water.

--- Page 88 Text ---
88 SWIMMING UNAIDED
TEACHING INTERMEDIATES
This chapter is designed for parents and children who have achieved the basic water
confidence skills,and are ready for more complex techniques.It should only be started
once your child can competently perform the skills in the Water Confidence chapter.
There is no big jump from beginners to intermediates. Lesson plan
Instead,it is part of a gradual process that builds on all Use the suggested lesson plans given at the start of
the skills that your child has learned in the previous each intermediates stage as the basis of your 30-minute
chapter,so that he is not only able to swim,but truly lessons,but amend them to suit your child’s readiness,
loves the water.This chapter is divided into three stages, experience,abilities,and skill level.The basic structure of
each with a minimum age requirement.Make sure you the lesson should remain relatively similar,but as your
don’t teach a child any skills that are meant for older child learns more skills,they can be absorbed into the
children.Instead,stick to the skills for your child’s age regular structure of your lessons.Try and have at least
group so you introduce them at the optimal time,when two,and ideally four,lessons per week,as this
age,ability,and readiness all intersect. continuity will help your child learn quickly and retain
Remember that you should progress only when your skills—long breaks may require periods of re-learning.
child is comfortable,practice consistently in enjoyable Your child may pick up certain skills very quickly,
lessons,and avoid frustration by only practicing while others may take weeks or months of practice.
complex activities for short intervals and at times when Go at your child’s pace and don’t push him to learn.
your child’s energy levels are highest.
Water Pouring Station and Activity Circuit
As for beginners,the Water Pouring Station (see
pp46–47) and Activity Circuit (see pp52–53) are still
key parts of the learning process.But whereas with
beginners most of the Activity Circuit was carried
out in their parent’s arms or on top of the water,now
your child may carry out some of the exercises with
his face in the water,and with less assistance.
Games and songs
These still play a very important role in teaching your
child at the intermediate levels,and group games
become more valuable as your child learns to copy
and imitate his peers.This helps him to overcome his
fears as he will watch other children performing the
actions he is nervous about.He will also learn to share
toys or your attention with others.

--- OCR from Page 88 Image 1 ---
ur

en

re

continuity will help your child learn quickly and retain
skills—long breaks may require periods of re-learning.
Your child may pick up certain skills very quickly,
while others may take weeks or months of practice.
Go at your child’s pace and don’t push him to learn.

Tern

--- Page 89 Text ---
TEACHING INTERMEDIATES 89
To keep your child interested in the lesson and to Now that your child has reached a period of increased
practice all the skills he has learned,limit the time spent coordination in his physical and mental development,
on any one activity to seven minutes or less.Make sure and can comfortably swim for seven seconds with a
you enjoy the lesson and do not rush,but remember strong,steady kick,as well as hold his breath and
that a young child’s attention span may be best suited enjoy it,he can add an important safety sequence to
to changing intervals of play. his swimming abilities.Although The Safety Sequence
(see pp108–09) does not make your child “drownproof,”
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE (pp90–101) it will enable him to swim to safety if he ever falls
You can start Intermediates:Stage One if your child into a pool.
is at least 14 months old and has mastered all the
age-appropriate skills in the Water Confidence chapter. INTERMEDIATES:STAGETHREE (pp110–23)
Let feedback from your child guide you as you When your child has mastered all the age-appropriate
introduce new skills,modify old ones,and help him skills in the Water Confidence chapter,has completed
increase his proficiency in the water. Intermediates:Stages One and Two,and is at least three
years old,progress to Intermediates:Stage Three.
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO (pp102–09) Experienced swimmers of this age are strong and
Once your child is at least 19 months old,has capable and maneuver farther and faster in the pool than
completed all the age-appropriate skills in the Water younger children.They can swim a distance of 20 feet
Confidence chapter,and can competently carry out (6 m),and are truly at home in the water.During this
all the skills in Intermediates:Stage One,move on to stage an important step is conquered when your child
Intermediates:Stage Two. learns to surface for a breath (see pp112–15) independently.

--- OCR from Page 89 Image 2 ---
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO (ppl02-—09)
Once your child is at least 1? months old, has
completed all the age-appropriate skills in the Water
Confidence chapter, and can competently carry out
all the skills in Intermediates: Stage One, move on to

Intermediates: Stage Two.

Ex]
capab
youn:
(6 m)
stage
learns

--- Page 90 Text ---
E
N
O
E
GAT
S
:
s
e
ta
i
d
e
m
r
e
t
n
i
)shtnom
41
ega
muminiM(

--- OCR from Page 90 Image 1 ---
(SH INOW bl IDV WNWINIW)
INO ADVILS -SALVIGAW YALNI

--- Page 91 Text ---
STAGE ONE LESSON PLAN 91
STAGE ONE LESSON PLAN
LESSON PLAN
REQUIREMENTS FOR STAGE ONE
WARM UP 3–5 minutes
Minimum Age:Your child should be at least
14 months old. Practice kicking and chasing a toy or
kicking drills. pp56;72
Skill Level: Your child has successfully
completed Beginners:Stages One
SONG BREAK 3–5 minutes
and Two,as well as the Adaptations
Sing “The People on the Bus”or a bathtime song. p39
for Three- to Four-year-old
Beginners if she started learning to
WARM-UP DIPS1–2 minutes
swim over the age of 36 months.
Short,cued dips using the techniques for
She can comfortably propel herself
a First Held Underwater Swim. pp64–65
with a steady kick,face submerged,
holding her breath for five seconds
ACTIVITY CIRCUIT10–12 minutes total pp52–53
without taking in water.
Structure the circuit as shown below.Go around the
circuit 3–5 times per lesson,spending a short time at
For the first of the intermediate stages,the lesson each station before moving on to the next.
plan is now adapted slightly to allow for the addition a)Water Pouring Station pp46–47
of more complex skills.These include Rob’s Tai Chi Pass b)Monkey Walk or Basketball pp77;45
(see pp92–93),which encourages an efficient swimming c)Jump from the Wall (second level) p63
posture and kick,as well as Turning Around Underwater d)Pick-a-ball Game p49
(see pp100–101),which begins to introduce the individual For the pass between parents,introduce the skills
skills needed to later accomplish The Safety Sequence below gradually,and in the order given.
(see pp108–109). i)Rob’s Tai Chi Pass3–5 times max pp92–93
Because the lesson plan for intermediates is simply ii)Fin Fun3–5 times max pp94–95
an extension of those for beginners,your sessions
APPROACHING THE WALL3–5 minutes total
will feel very familiar to your child.This helps create a
Guided Swim to the Wall (first or second level
smooth transition from the foundation skills to these
depending on ability) 3 times max pp96–97
more complex skills.You will also find that your child’s
endurance and proficiency will be increasing. JUMP OFF THE WALL3–5 minutes total
As before,use the lesson plan as a guideline only,and Jump,Dip,and Swim(first or second level
plan your lessons according to your child’s readiness, depending on ability) 3 times max pp98–99
comfort,and current abilities.
BALANCE orRUNAND JUMP
Note that younger children will still need to be
3–5 minutes pp68;51
given the Breath-holding Cue (see pp60–61) before
being submerged underwater by their parent.However, TIMETOGO1 minute p69
children over the age of three can simply be given a Turning Around Underwater (first or second
verbal cue rather than the lift cue involved in the level depending on ability) 1–2 times max pp100–101
Breath-holding Cue.

--- Page 92 Text ---
92 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE
ROB’S TAI CHI PASS
TEACHING TIPS
The forward movement is
To provide a boost to swimmers who are ready to increase the
generated at the shin or foot
distance and duration of their swim,Rob devised a special Tai area,not at the head.You should
merely guide the head with your
Chi–like pass for parents to use.This pass not only provides
fingertips and not push forward.
forward momentum toward a receiving parent,it also balances,
Lightly flick the foot at the end of
aligns,and positions the body in an efficient,prone,horizontal the sequence to stimulate the kick.
position and stimulates your child to kick.
2 Once your fingers touch his neck,slip your non-
dominant hand out from under your child’s other
armpit and brush it down along the side of his body.
At this point your dominant hand should still be in
contact with your child’s head,guiding it forward,while
your non-dominant hand should be in contact with his
torso (as your child becomes more proficient you can
let go with this hand).Balance him if he needs it.
1 Stand in waist- to chest-deep water opposite your
partner,4–5 feet (1.2–1.5 m) apart.Hold your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43) and cue him to go underwater.
As his face enters the water,push forward under both
his armpits.The receiver should count the number of
seconds your child is submerged for,ensuring that it
does not exceed his current ability.Reposition your
dominant hand (your right hand if you are right-
handed) at the base of his head by slipping your hand
out from under his armpit,lifting your elbow,and
rotating your wrist so you place your fingertips at the
base of his neck.Use your fingers to guide (but not
push) the head forward as he kicks.

--- OCR from Page 92 Image 1 ---
92 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE

ROB’S TAI CHI PASS

To provide a boost to swimmers who are ready to increase the
distance and duration of their swim, Rob devised a special Tai
Chi-like pass for parents to use. This pass not only provides

forward momentum toward a receiving parent, it also balances,
aligns, and positions the body in an efficient, prone, horizontal

position and stimulates your child to kick.

| Stand in waist- to chest-deep water opposite your

partner, 4—5 feet (1.2—1.5 m) apart. Hold your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43) and cue him to go underwater.
As his face enters the water, push forward under both
his armpits. The receiver should count the number of
seconds your child is submerged for, ensuring that it
does not exceed his current ability. Reposition your
dominant hand (your right hand if you are right-
handed) at the base of his head by slipping your hand
out from under his armpit, lifting your elbow, and
rotating your wrist so you place your fingertips at the
base of his neck. Use your fingers to guide (but not
push) the head forward as he kicks.

TEACHING TIPS

The forward movement is
generated at the shin or foot
area, not at the head. You should
merely guide the head with your
fingertips and not push forward.

Lightly flick the foot at the end of
the sequence to stimulate the kick.

2 Once your fingers touch his neck, slip your non-
dominant hand out from under your child’s other
armpit and brush it down along the side of his body.
At this point your dominant hand should still be in
contact with your child’s head, guiding it forward, while
your non-dominant hand should be in contact with his
torso (as your child becomes more proficient you can

let go with this hand). Balance him if he needs it.

--- OCR from Page 92 Image 2 ---
TEACHING TIPS

The forward movement is
generated at the shin or foot
area, not at the head. You should
merely guide the head with your
fingertips and not push forward.

Lightly flick the foot at the end of
the sequence to stimulate the kick.

fers touch his neck, slip your non-
out from under your child’s other
down along the side of his body.
lominant hand should still be in
lild’s head, guiding it forward, while
hand should be in contact with his
becomes more proficient you can
1}. Balance him if he needs it.

--- OCR from Page 92 Image 3 ---
| Stand in waist- to chest-deep water opposite your

partner, 4—5 feet (1.2—1.5 m) apart. Hold your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43} and cue him to go underwater.

--- Page 93 Text ---
ROB’S TAI CHI PASS 93
3 Continue running your non-dominant hand along 4 Both your hands should now be clear of your
the side of your child’s body until you reach child,and he should be propelling himself forward
either his shin,ankle,or foot,depending on where the toward the receiver,who should catch him,lift him up
swing of his kick is.Lightly flick the foot upward and out of the water,and praise him.
forward so you slightly push your child forward,
stimulating a kick.At the moment of thrust,release
your hands from your child’s head and foot.

--- OCR from Page 93 Image 1 ---
ROB’S TAI CHI PASS 93

L. ———

3 Continue running your non-dominant hand along 4. Both your hands should now be clear of your
the side of your child’s body until you reach

child, and he should be propelling himself forward
either his shin, ankle, or foot, depending on where the toward the receiver, who should catch him, lift him up
swing of his kick is. Lightly flick the foot upward and out of the water, and praise him.

forward so you slightly push your child forward,

stimulating a kick. At the moment of thrust, release

your hands from your child’s head and foot.

--- OCR from Page 93 Image 2 ---
3 Continue running your non-dominant hand along
the side of your child’s body until you reach

either his shin, ankle, or foot, depending on where the
swing of his kick is. Lightly flick the foot upward and
forward so you slightly push your child forward,
stimulating a kick. At the moment of thrust, release
= =

warestie «hi) te Le a ee

wer haw tT eee

ROB’S TAI CHI PASS 93

| a ~ — ae tg

4. Both your hands should now be clear of your
child, and he should be propelling himself forward
toward the receiver, who should catch him, lift him up
out of the water, and praise him.

--- OCR from Page 93 Image 3 ---
ROB’S TAI CHI PASS 93

inning your non-dominant hand along

your child’s body until you reach

nkle, or foot, depending on where the

-is. Lightly flick the foot upward and

lightly push your child forward,

x. At the moment of thrust, release ~
——

Syvatr child’c head and fant |

4. Both your hands should now be clear of your
child, and he should be propelling himself forward

toward the receiver, who should catch him, lift him up
out of the water, and praise him.

--- Page 94 Text ---
94 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE
FIN FUN
OBJECTIVES ANDTIPS
To improve kicking,body alignment,
This is an ideal stage to introduce fins to your child’s lessons.
and lung capability.
They are good learning aids since they lift the foot to the top of
Allow your child time to adjust to
the water,producing an efficient kick,plus they build,tone,and the fins during kicking exercises.
condition the leg muscles.However,ensure you practice without If your child is unsure about the fins,
practice wearing them in the bathtub.
fins at times so you and your child are familiar with her natural
Fins should be made of flexible
abilities.Swimming at the surface through a hoop provides focus
rubber or soft plastic.
and motivation and encourages a streamlined body position.

--- OCR from Page 94 Image 1 ---
94 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE

FIN FUN

This is an ideal stage to introduce fins to your child’s lessons.
They are good learning aids since they lift the foot to the top of
the water, producing an efficient kick, plus they build, tone, and
condition the leg muscles. However, ensure you practice without
fins at times so you and your child are familiar with her natural
abilities. Swimming at the surface through a hoop provides focus

and motivation and encourages a streamlined body position.

OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To improve kicking, body alignment,

and lung capability.

Allow your child time to adjust to
the fins during kicking exercises.

If your child is unsure about the fins,

practice wearing them in the bathtub.

Fins should be made of flexible

rubber or soft plastic.

--- OCR from Page 94 Image 2 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To improve kicking, body alignment,
and lung capability.

Allow your child time to adjust to

the fins during kicking exercises.

If your child is unsure about the fins,
practice wearing them in the bathtub.

Fins should be made of flexible

rubber or soft plastic.

--- Page 95 Text ---
FIN FUN 95
1 You will need three adults to practice hoop swims. 2 The sender should cue your child to go
The sender places fins on the child while she is underwater,then use Rob’s Tai Chi Pass (see
sitting on the pool wall.Two adults stand opposite each pp92–93) to guide her forward through the hoop
other in waist- to chest-deep water,4–6 feet (1.2–1.8 m) to the receiver.The child may grab the dive ring from
apart.The receiver should hold a dive ring or toy under the receiver.The sender should check that the number
the water to direct the child’s eyes and head downward. of seconds the child spends underwater does not
The third adult stands midway between the sender and exceed her current ability.The receiver should catch
receiver,holding a hoop in the water.The sender should the child and lift her out of the water.Increase the
hold the child in the Pass Hold (see p43),encouraging length of the swim gradually in one-second increments
her to “swim through the hoop to get the ring.” over the weeks and months.

--- OCR from Page 95 Image 1 ---
| You will need three adults to practice hoop swims.
The sender places fins on the child while she is
sitting on the pool wall. Two adults stand opposite each
other in waist- to chest-deep water, 4~6 feet (1.2—1.8 m)
apart. The receiver should hold a dive ring or toy under
the water to direct the child’s eyes and head downward.
The third adult stands midway between the sender and
receiver, holding a hoop in the water. The sender should
hold the child in the Pass Hold (see p43), encouraging

her to “swim through the hoop to get the ring.”

FIN FUN 95

2 The sender should cue your child to go
underwater, then use Rob’s Tai Chi Pass (see
pp92~—93) to guide her forward through the hoop

to the receiver. The child may grab the dive ring from
the receiver. The sender should check that the number
of seconds the child spends underwater does not
exceed her current ability. The receiver should catch
the child and lift her out of the water. Increase the
length of the swim gradually in one-second increments
over the weeks and months.

--- Page 96 Text ---
96 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE
GUIDED SWIM TO
OBJECTIVES
THE WALL
To encourage independent
swimming toward the wall.
Your child has experienced the liberating sensation of an unaided To maintain body alignment by
providing hands-on guidance.
swim between her parents.Swimming unaided to the wall occurs
To link swimming to the wall with
in very distinct stages,and to ensure your child has the correct grabbing the wall.
body alignment and isn’t alarmed by swimming toward a looming To keep your child from being
alarmed by the looming sight of the
concrete wall,you need to guide her,first by holding her under
pool wall when she opens hereyes.
the armpits,then with a reassuring touch at the back of the head.
FIRST LEVEL SECOND LEVEL
Place a toy on the wall as a target.With your child in 1 Once your child is comfortable at the first level,you
the Pass Hold (see p43),stand 5–6 feet (1.5–1.8 m) can move on to the second level.Follow the first
from the wall.Your count will be “1,2,lift,down,1,2,3, level,but stand 6 feet (1.8 m) from the wall.Your new
grab the wall.”Cue your child to go underwater and count will be “1,2,lift,down,high elbow,kick,kick,
submerge her (1,2,lift,down).With both hands under grab the wall.”Cue your child to go underwater and
her armpits walk slowly toward the wall as you count submerge her.As her face submerges,slip your
“1,2,3.”Once you reach the wall,if your child does not dominant hand (your right hand if you are right-
automatically grab it and lift her head,lift her and tell handed) out from under her armpit,raise your elbow
her to ”grab the wall.”Reward her with the toy.You can and rotate your wrist so that your fingertips move from
gradually increase the length of time underwater to her armpit,over her back,and end up behind her head
match that of her unaided swim. at the base of her neck,guiding her toward the wall.

--- OCR from Page 96 Image 1 ---
OBJECTIVES

To encourage independent
swimming toward the wall.

To maintain body alignment by
providing hands-on guidance.

To link swimming to the wall with
grabbing the wall.

To keep your child from being
alarmed by the looming sight of the

pool wall when she opens her eyes.

--- OCR from Page 96 Image 2 ---
Ep SE RS IE I IEEE EIEIO I EEE IS

the armpits, then with a reassuring touch at the back of the head.

FIRST LEVEL

SECOND LEVEL

Place a toy on the wall as a target. With your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43), stand 5—6 feet (1.5—1.8 m)
from the wall. Your count will be “1, 2, lift, down, |, 2, 3,
grab the wall.” Cue your child to go underwater and
submerge her (I, 2, lift, down). With both hands under
her armpits walk slowly toward the wall as you count
“1, 2, 3.” Once you reach the wall, if your child does not
automatically grab it and lift her head, lift her and tell
her to "grab the wall.” Reward her with the toy. You can
gradually increase the length of time underwater to
match that of her unaided swim.

Once your child

can move on to
level, but stand 6 fee
count will be “1, 2, li
grab the wall.” Cue )
submerge her. As he
dominant hand (you
handed) out from u
and rotate your wri:
her armpit, over her
at the base of her n

--- OCR from Page 96 Image 3 ---
SECOND LEVEL

our child in Once your child is comfortable at the first level, you

5-18 m) can move on to the second level. Follow the first

--- Page 97 Text ---
GUIDED SWIM TO THE WALL 97
2 Continue guiding your child toward the wall for if she doesn’t,use your non-dominant hand to lift her
a count of two (“kick,kick”) with your non- under her armpit and raise her to the surface asking
dominant hand firmly under your child’s armpit.When her to “grab the wall.”When she has grabbed the wall
she reaches the wall,she may reach out and grab it,but praise and reward her with the toy.

--- OCR from Page 97 Image 1 ---
GUIDED SWIM TO THE WALL 97

Continue guiding your child toward the wall for if she doesn’t, use your non-dominant hand to lift her
a count of two (“kick, kick”) with your non- under her armpit and raise her to the surface asking
dominant hand firmly under your child’s armpit. When her to “grab the wall.” When she has grabbed the wall

she reaches the wall, she may reach out and grab it, but praise and reward her with the toy.

--- Page 98 Text ---
98 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE
JUMP, DIP, AND SWIM
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
To maintain the correct forward-
Your child has already learned how to carry out a safe,
lean position when jumping.
leaning jump from the wall (see p63),and now you can
If your child hesitates when
transform this skill into a jump,submersion,and swim.At jumping,move closer to her and
keep your hands on or very near
first,allow her to only briefly submerge while you guide her
her armpits while she jumps.
toward you under the water.Then,with time and practice,she
Don’t move on to the next level
will be able to accomplish a jump,dip,and unaided swim before your child is comfortable
with the current one.
underwater toward you.
FIRST LEVEL
Stand in waist- to chest-deep water and place your child in a sitting
position on the pool wall,with your hands under her armpits.Count
“1,2,3,”and gently rub your hands under her armpits to cue her to
jump,then move your hands 2–3 inches (5–7.5 cm) under the water.
When she jumps,catch her under her armpits as she submerges.Walk
two steps backward,gently guiding her with you for a brief swim,then
lift her back to the surface.Over the weeks,increase the number of
seconds your child remains submerged to two,then three seconds.

--- OCR from Page 98 Image 1 ---
98 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE

JUMP, DIP, AND SWIM

Your child has already learned how to carry out a safe,
leaning jump from the wall (see p63), and now you can
transform this skill into a jump, submersion, and swim. At
first, allow her to only briefly submerge while you guide her
toward you under the water. Then, with time and practice, she

will be able to accomplish a jump, dip, and unaided swim

underwater toward you.

OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To maintain the correct forward-

lean position when jumping.

if your child hesitates when
jumping, move closer to her and
eep your hands on or very near

her armpits while she jumps.

Don’t move on to the next level

before your child is comfortable
with the current one.

FIRST LEVEL

Stand in waist- to chest-deep water and place your child in a sitting

position on the pool wall, with your hands under her armpits. Count

“1, 2,3,’ and gently rub your hands under her armpits to cue her to
jump, then move your hands 2—3 inches (5—7.5 cm) under the water.
When she jumps, catch her under her armpits as she submerges. Walk

two steps backward, gently guiding her with you for a brief swim, then

lift her back to the surface. Over the weeks, increase the number of
seconds your child remains submerged to two, then three seconds.

--- OCR from Page 98 Image 2 ---
ALLOty CEI YY PINE GN WEEE eiinil MUM I SS Willin Vu MINIS GIhl . a .
4 7 7 ad uy cS her armpits while she jumps.

toward you under the water. Then, with time and practice, she nen ens ee

will be able to accomplish a jump, dip, and unaided swim before your child is comfortable
with the current one.
underwater toward you.

FIRST LEVEL

Stand in waist- to chest-deep water and place your child in a sitting

position on the pool wall, with your hands under her armpits. Count

“1, 2,3,’ and gently rub your hands under her armpits to cue her to
Timp than mavo var hande 92% inchac [R77 EF orem) rndar tha watar wa

--- OCR from Page 98 Image 3 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To maintain the correct forward-
lean position when jumping.

if your child hesitates when
jumping, move closer to her and
eep your hands on or very near

her armpits while she jumps.

Don’t move on to the next level

before your child is comfortable

with the current one.

--- Page 99 Text ---
JUMP, DIP, AND SWIM 99
SECOND LEVEL
Once you have practiced the first level for a
few weeks,move on to the second level.This
is similar to the first level,but this time your
child will swim unaided.Ask her to jump
from a sitting position on the pool wall,but
instead of catching her immediately as she
jumps,hold your hands close to your body
under the water and take two steps backward
to encourage her to swim toward you.Then
catch her and bring her to the surface.
THIRD LEVEL
Once your child is proficient at the second level,repeat the
technique but hold a toy under the water for your child to
retrieve.This simple gesture adds focus and an additional
element of fun,and encourages a good,horizontal,streamlined
position underwater,as she will aim her eyes and face downward
toward the toy rather than simply toward her parent.

--- OCR from Page 99 Image 1 ---
SECOND LEVEL

Once you have practiced the first level for a
few weeks, move on to the second level. This
is similar to the first level, but this time your
child will swim unaided. Ask her to jump
from a sitting position on the pool wall, but
instead of catching her immediately as she
jumps, hold your hands close to your body
under the water and take two steps backward
to encourage her to swim toward you. Then
catch her and bring her to the surface.

JUMP, DIP, AND SWIM 99

THIRD LEVEL

Once your child is proficient at the second level, repeat the
technique but hold a toy under the water for your child to
retrieve. This simple gesture adds focus and an additional
element of fun, and encourages a good, horizontal, streamlined

position underwater, as she will aim her eyes and face downward
toward the toy rather than simply toward her parent.

--- OCR from Page 99 Image 2 ---
ticed the first level for a
to the second level. This
t level, but this time your
ded. Ask her to jump
ion on the pool wall, but
her immediately as she
nds close to your body
1 take two steps backward
» swim toward you. Then
her to the surface.

JUMP, DIP, AND SWIM

99

--- Page 100 Text ---
100 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE
TURNING AROUND
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
UNDERWATER
To build on the foundation skills
learned in the Time to Go ritual of
“Ring around the Rosie”(see p69).
Now that your child has increased his breath-holding abilities
To execute an assisted 180°turn
and comfort underwater,he is ready to turn 180° underwater.
in a vertical position.
This ability to turn will become one of the lynchpins of the
If you feel an older beginner is
starting to turn,encourage this by
important Safety Sequence (see pp108–09),which involves turning
guiding his turn.
around to face the wall,grabbing the wall,and climbing out.
FIRST LEVEL
Follow the sequence for the well-practiced Time to Go exit
ritual of “Ring Around the Rosie”(see p69).At the “We all fall
down”verse,lift your child up for a breath,submerge him,but
instead of immediately raising him to the surface,allow him to remain
underwater holding his breath for a slow count of “1,2.”Then raise him
up out of the water and praise him.Practice once per lesson.

--- OCR from Page 100 Image 1 ---
100 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE ONE

TU RNING AROUND OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
UNDERWATER kere inthe Tie to Go a of

“Ring around the Rosie” (see p69).

Now that your child has increased his breath-holding abilities
To execute an assisted 180° turn
and comfort underwater, he is ready to turn 180° underwater. in a vertical position.

This ability to turn will become one of the lynchpins of the If you feel an older beginner is

important Safety Sequence (see pplO08-09), which involves turning a galliaee tnis"oy

guiding his turn.

around to face the wall, grabbing the wall, and climbing out.

ritual of “Ring Around the Rosie” (see p69). At the “We a
down” verse, lift your child up for a breath, submerge him
instead of immediately raising him to the surface, allow

--- OCR from Page 100 Image 2 ---
OO I EE

Wh ad VNb ur

This ability to turn will become one of the lynchpins of the

If you fee
important Safety Sequence (see pplO08-09), which involves turning ie
guiding
around to face the wall, grabbing the wall, and climbing out. =

FIRST LEVEL

Follow the sequence for the well-practiced Time to Go exit

--- OCR from Page 100 Image 3 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To build on the foundation skills
learned in the Time to Go ritual of
“Ring around the Rosie” (see p69).

To execute an assisted 180° turn

in a vertical position.

If you feel an older beginner is
starting to turn, encourage this by

guiding his turn.

--- Page 101 Text ---
TURNING AROUND UNDERWATER 101
SECOND LEVEL
Once you have practiced the first level for several weeks, to slowly turn him 180°—either clockwise or counter-
and your child comfortably holds his breath for two clockwise depending on which way he naturally turns—
seconds,you can try turning him.Follow the steps for so that he ends up facing your stomach.Raise him up
the first level,but once he is underwater,use your hands and exclaim,“Peekaboo!”

--- OCR from Page 101 Image 1 ---
SECOND LEVEL

Once you have practiced the first level for several weeks,
and your child comfortably holds his breath for two
seconds, you can try turning him. Follow the steps for
the first level, but once he is underwater; use your hands

TURNING AROUND UNDERWATER 101

to slowly turn him 180°—either clockwise or counter
clockwise depending on which way he naturally turns—
so that he ends up facing your stomach. Raise him up
and exclaim,“Peekaboo!”

—_——s
a

a a
= r

--- Page 102 Text ---
0
w
t
e
gat
s
:
s
e
ta
i
d
e
m
r
e
t
n
i
)shtnom
91
ega
muminim(

--- OCR from Page 102 Image 1 ---
ae.

A wow er 6] qoy tli |
OML ADVIS -SALVIGAW YALNi

--- Page 103 Text ---
STAGE TWO LESSON PLAN 103
STAGE TWO LESSON PLAN
LESSON PLAN
REQUIREMENTS FOR STAGE TWO
WARM UP3–5 minutes
Minimum Age: Your child should be at least
Practice kicking and chasing a toy or kicking drills. pp56;72
19 months old.
Skill Level: Your child has successfully SONG BREAK3–5 minutes
Sing “The People on the Bus”or a bathtime song. p39
completed Beginners:Stages One
and Two and Intermediates:Stage WARM-UP DIPS1–2 minutes
One,as well as the Adaptations
Short,cued dips using the technique for
for Three- to Four-Year- Old a First Held Underwater Swim. pp64–65
Beginners if she started learning to
swim over the age of 36 months. ACTIVITY CIRCUIT10–12 minutes total pp52–53
Structure the circuit as shown below.Go round 3–5 times.
She can comfortably propel herself
a) Water Pouring Station pp46–47
with a steady kick,face submerged,
b)Monkey Walk or Basketball pp77;45
holding her breath for up to seven
c) Jump,Dip and Swim pp98–99
seconds without taking in water.
d)Pick-a-ball Game p49
For the pass between parents use Rob’s Tai Chi Pass with
your child wearing fins5 times max pp92–93
To begin with,practice the skills under 1 (below,left).Once your
By this stage your child will have a good level of
child has mastered these exercises,replace with 2 (below,right).
endurance and both physical and mental coordination.
Since she will be able to swim underwater for up to 1.INTERMEDIATE 2.THE SAFETY
SWIM TO THE WALL SEQUENCE
seven seconds with a strong,steady,and effective kick,
2–3 minutes, 2–4 minutes total
you can now add the important Safety Sequence
3 times max p104 a)Unaided Turn
(see pp108–09) to her repertoire.Although no child Underwater(fourth
JUMP OFF THE WALL
should ever be considered “drownproof,”learning level) 3 times max p107
2–3 minutes b) The Safety Sequence
and consistently practicing safety skills can help
Jump,Swim and Turn (first,second,third or
your child to make her way back to the edge of— Back to the Wall (first or fourth level depending
and then out of—the pool in the event of an second level depending on on ability) 2 times max
accidental water entry. ability) 3 times max p105 pp108–09
The Safety Sequence is a technique for experienced VERTICAL
swimmers.Include it in the lesson plan only once the SUBMERSIONS AND
TURNS 3 minutes
following techniques have been comfortably mastered
Unaided Turn Underwater
by your child:Intermediate Swim to the Wall (see p104),
(first,second or third level
Jump,Swim,and Turn Back to the Wall (see p105),and depending on ability)
Unaided Turn Underwater (see pp106–07).To maintain 3 times max pp106–07
your child’s focus and energy,once you are ready to
BALANCEorRUNANDJUMP 3–5 minutes pp68;51
practice the Safety Sequence eliminate the above three
drills from the lesson plan and concentrate on the TIME TO GO1 minute p69
Safety Sequence instead. Unaided Turn Underwater2 times max p106–07

--- Page 104 Text ---
104 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO
INTERMEDIATE SWIM
OBJECTIVES
TO THE WALL
To create an increasingly more
independent swim toward the wall
while maintaining contact.
Your child’s ever-increasing comfort and confidence,his expanding
To encourage a horizontal body
lung capacity,and his lengthening strong swim all indicate that he
position and a steady kick.
is ready to further develop his swimming capabilities.For this swim, To build on the skills gained in the
Guided Swim to the Wall (see
he will be much more independent since you will not maneuver or
pp96–97).
push him but merely guide him toward the wall with your fingertips.
1 Place a toy on the pool wall.With your child in 2 Gently slip your non-dominant hand out from
the Pass Hold (see p43),stand 6 feet (1.8 m) away under his other armpit,and rest your hand by
from the wall.Cue your child to go underwater and your side.Walk forward,guiding him slowly toward the
submerge him.As his face enters the water,slip your wall with your dominant hand.Allow him to swim to
dominant hand (your right hand if you are right- the wall,grab it,raise his head out of the water,and
handed) out from under his armpit,move it over pick up the toy as a reward.Make sure that the time
his back,and place your fingertips at the base of his submerged does not exceed your child’s current breath-
head at the neck. holding ability.

--- OCR from Page 104 Image 1 ---
OBJECTIVES

To create an increasingly more
independent swim toward the wall

while maintaining contact.

To encourage a horizontal body
position and a steady kick.

To build on the skills gained in the
Guided Swim to the Wall (see
pp96—-97).

--- OCR from Page 104 Image 2 ---
ae = = = ee | | fo E

is ready to further develop his swimming capabilities. For this swim, To build on the skills gained in the
he will be much more independent since you will not maneuver or = a ae ee
pp96-97).

push him but merely guide him toward the wall with your fingertips.

| Place a toy on the pool wall. With your child in 2 Gently slip your non-dominant hand out from

the Pass Hold (see p43), stand 6 feet (1.8 m) away under his other armpit, and rest your hand by

--- Page 105 Text ---
JUMP, SWIM, AND TURN BACK TO THE WALL 105
JUMP, SWIM, AND TURN
OBJECTIVES
BACK TO THE WALL
To encourage a jump from the
wall that includes the increased
breath holding of a swim.
You can now channel your child’s sturdy,reliable,cued jump with
To teach your child to transfer
a submersion into a jump with a short swim out to you,and from a vertical lean to a swim.
then a jump with a short swim,above-water turn,and a swim To link the different skills of a jump
off the wall with a swim,followed
back to the wall.This confident jump needs to be safe,so ensure
by a swim back to the wall.
that your child waits for your count before leaving the wall.
FIRSTLEVEL SECONDLEVEL
Sit your child on the pool wall.Stand in chest-deep Once your child is confident at the first level,you
water 3–6 feet (90–180 cm) away from the wall and can combine the jump off the wall and swim with an
face your child.Hold your hands out and instruct him immediate swim back to the wall.Follow as for the
to jump out to you after your count.Count “1,2,3”to first level,but once your child swims to you,catch
cue the jump.Allow your child to swim out to you, him,lift him briefly for a breath,turn him around 180°,
then reward him with a toy. and let him swim back to the wall (see opposite).

--- OCR from Page 105 Image 1 ---
D/VWLER. TX PTE VV/ALL wall that includes the increased

You can now channel your child’s sturdy, reliable, cued jump with

breath holding of a swim.

To teach your child to transfer
a submersion into a jump with a short swim out to you, and from a vertical lean to a swim.
then a jump with a short swim, above-water turn, and a swim To link the different skills of a jump

back to the wall. This confident jump needs to be safe, so ensure

off the wall with a swim, followed
by a swim back to the wall.

that your child waits for your count before leaving the wall.

FIRST LEVEL

Sit your child on the pool wall. Stand in chest-deep
water 3—6 feet (90-180 cm) away from the wall and
face your child. Hold your hands out and instruct him
to jump out to you after your count. Count “1, 2, 3” to
cue the jump. Allow your child to swim out to you,
then reward him with a toy.

SECOND LEVEL

Once your child is confident at the first level, you

can combine the jump off the wall and swim with an
immediate swim back to the wall. Follow as for the
first level, but once your child swims to you, catch
him, lift him briefly for a breath, turn him around 180°,
and let him swim back to the wall (see opposite).

--- OCR from Page 105 Image 2 ---
OBJECTIVES

To encourage a jump from the

wal

that includes the increased

breath holding of a swim.

To

teach your child to transfer

from a vertical lean to a swim.

To
off
by a swim back to the wall.

ink the different skills of a jump

the wall with a swim, followed

--- Page 106 Text ---
106 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO
UNAIDED TURN
TEACHING TIPS
UNDERWATER
Keep your hands close to your
child while she is learning these
skills.You may need to help to turn
For this new skill,you and your child will link several sequences her or lift her for air.
in a specific order.She can already submerge vertically holding Note which side your child naturally
turns toward—which shoulder is
her breath for several seconds,and you’ve helped her to turn 180°
she looking over? Help her turn in
underwater—now you are going to teach her to do this turn this direction if necessary.
independently,first to you,then to the wall.
FIRSTLEVEL
Play “peekaboo.”Stand in waist- to chest-deep water
facing your partner,2 feet (60 cm) apart.Hold your child
vertically facing toward you,so the receiver is hidden from
your child’s view.The receiver should call out,“Where am
I?”Your child should turn her chin over one shoulder to
look for the receiver,thus initiating a body rotation.If she
does not twist round,turn her 180° to face the receiver.
Exclaim,“Peekaboo!”Repeat several times per lesson for at
least two lessons.

--- OCR from Page 106 Image 1 ---
STAGE TWO

TURN TEACHING TIPS
eep your hands close to your
TER child while she is learning these

skills. You may need to help to turn
our child will link several sequences her or lift her for air

ready submerge vertically holding lote which side your child naturally
turns toward—which shoulder is

pA fe)
s, and you've helped her to turn 180 she looking over? Help her turn in

ing to teach her to do this turn this direction if necessary.

ien to the wall.

o chest-deep water
n}) apart. Hold your «
1e receiver is hidden from
uld call out,“Where am

in over one shoulder to —
1g a body rotation. If she
0° to face the receiver.

al times per lesson for at

--- OCR from Page 106 Image 2 ---
TEACHING TIPS

eep your hands close to your
child while she is learning these
skills. You may need to help to turn
her or lift her for air

lote which side your child naturally
turns toward—which shoulder is

she looking over? Help her turn in

this direction if necessary.

--- OCR from Page 106 Image 3 ---
ner breatn for several seconds, and you ve neiped her to turn loU™ she looking over? +

underwater—now you are going to teach her to do this turn this direction if nec

independently, first to you, then to the wall.

FIRST LEVEL

Play “peekaboo.” Stand in waist- to chest-deep water

facing your partner, 2 feet (60 cm) apart. Hold your ch

vertically facino taward votr.ca the receiver ic hidden fram

--- Page 107 Text ---
UNAIDED TURN UNDERWATER 107
SECONDLEVEL THIRDLEVEL
Once your child is confident at the first level,you can Once your child turns every time at the second level,
move on to the second.Stand holding your child as you can move on to the third.Hide a toy on the pool
you did for the first level,but this time the receiver wall.Stand with your child facing you 10–12 inches
places a dive ring between her thumb and index finger. (25–30 cm) from the wall.Turn her so she can see the
Turn your child toward the receiver,who should show ring,then turn her back to face you,and ask her to
her the ring,placing it underwater in line with her find the ring then grab the wall.Staying above water,she
stomach.Then turn your child back around to face should look over her shoulder,rotating her body and
you.Tell her to “Get the ring!”Give her a cue to go grab the wall.Practice two to three times per lesson.
underwater,submerge her,and release her.She should
turn,grab the ring,and then be lifted by the receiver. FOURTHLEVEL
Once your child successfully accomplishes the third
level,you can move on to the fourth.Stand as for the
third level,then give her the cue to go underwater,
submerge her,and gently release her.She should turn
underwater to grab the wall and find the toy.Practice
two to three times per lesson for several weeks.

--- OCR from Page 107 Image 1 ---
SECOND LEVEL

Once your child is confident at the first level, you can
move on to the second. Stand holding your child as
you did for the first level, but this time the receiver
places a dive ring between her thumb and index finger.
Turn your child toward the receiver, who should show
her the ring, placing it underwater in line with her
stomach. Then turn your child back around to face
you. Tell her to “Get the ring!” Give her a cue to go
underwater, submerge her, and release her. She should
turn, grab the ring, and then be lifted by the receiver.

UNAIDED TURN UNDERWATER 107

THIRD LEVEL

Once your child turns every time at the second level,
you can move on to the third. Hide a toy on the pool
wall. Stand with your child facing you 10—12 inches
(25—30 cm) from the wall. Turn her so she can see the
ring, then turn her back to face you, and ask her to
find the ring then grab the wall. Staying above water, she
should look over her shoulder, rotating her body and
grab the wall. Practice two to three times per lesson.

FOURTH LEVEL
Once your child successfully accomplishes the third

level, you can move on to the fourth. Stand as for the
third level, then give her the cue to go underwater,

submerge her, and gently release her. She should turn
underwater to grab the wall and find the toy. Practice
two to three times per lesson for several weeks.

--- Page 108 Text ---
108 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE TWO
THE SAFETY SEQUENCE
OBJECTIVES
To link multiple skills together in
This vital safety sequence should be used in addition to the
sequence to ensure water safety.
safety plan on pp24–25.It will teach your child to safely jump
To rehearse water entry by
off the wall,turn around by herself in the water,swim back to simulating a fall into water in a
non-threatening fashion.
the wall,grab the wall,and exit the pool.This means that if your
To encourage a repeatable,
child ever faces an accidental water entry,this sequence will rehearsable sequence that is
automatically implemented in the
enable her to swim confidently and wall to the wall and climb
event of an accidental water entry.
out of the pool.
FIRST LEVEL
1 Sit your child on the pool wall.Tell her that her job 2 Once she has jumped,raise the elbow of your
is to jump in,turn around underwater,and come extended arm and use your fingertips to scoop
back to the wall (you can put a toy on the wall to and turn her around at the base of the head,guiding
encourage her).Place your hip firmly against the wall her back to the wall.Your other hand should now
on the side of your child toward which she usually splash near the wall,creating a visible and audible
turns (see pp100–101).Place your hand that’s nearest to target.Once she has reached the wall,boost one of
her under her armpit,and stretch out your other arm her knees up,and help her to climb out.
so your hand is about 3–4 feet (90–120 cm) from
the wall.With this hand,splash the water as a marker SECOND LEVEL
of how far you want her to jump.Cue the jump by Once your child can perform this sequence with less
counting “1,2,3,”then keep your nearest hand lightly guidance,practice without spotting her or guiding her
under her armpit so you can spot her jump and make back to the wall,but continue to splash near the wall
sure she leaves the wall correctly. to create a target.Help her out of the pool.

--- OCR from Page 108 Image 1 ---
PINOT LEVEL

1 Sit your child on the pool wall. Tell her that her job (2
is to jump in, turn around underwater and come y

--- OCR from Page 108 Image 2 ---
OBJECTIVES

To link multiple skills together in
sequence to ensure water safety.

To rehearse water entry by
simulating a fall into water in a

non-threatening fashion.

To encourage a repeatable,
rehearsable sequence that is
automatically implemented in the

event of an accidental water entry.

--- OCR from Page 108 Image 3 ---
er that her job 2 Once she has jumped, raise the elbow of your

4 and come extended arm and use your fingertips to scoop

and turn her around at the base of the head, guiding
have Aa-l thn thao ounmnll] Warne atha

‘he wall to

yNnct tha unll

ew hand chard nau

--- Page 109 Text ---
THE SAFETY SEQUENCE 109
THIRD LEVEL
Once your child is competent at the second level
and has practiced for several weeks,ask your partner
to sit next to your child on the edge of the pool
with their toes in the water.Tell your child to
“Jump in,turn around,look for [your partner’s]
toes,grab the walls and climb out and sit next to
her.”Follow the sequence for the second level,but
do not splash the water near the wall as your child
should aim for your partner’s toes.At the end,your
child should climb out and sit next to your partner.
FOURTH LEVEL
Once your child has competently practiced the
third level for a number of weeks,you can progress
to the fourth level.Use the same technique as for
the third level,but for this level your partner
should sit in a chair on the deck.This time,after
performing the sequence under your watchful eye
while you are in the water,your child should climb
out of the pool to hug your partner,thus taking
him far away from the pool’s edge.

--- OCR from Page 109 Image 1 ---
child should climb out and sit next to your partner.

FOURTH LEVEL
Once your child has competently practiced the
third level for a number of weeks, you can progress
to the fourth level. Use the same technique as for
the third level, but for this level your partner
should sit in a chair on the deck. This time, after
performing the sequence under your watchful eye
while you are in the water, your child should climb
out of the pool to hug your partner, thus taking
him far away from the pool’s edge.

--- OCR from Page 109 Image 2 ---
THIR
Once
and hi
to sit
with t
“Jump
toes, ¢
her” F
do no
shoulc
child s

FOU

--- Page 110 Text ---
e
e
r
h
t
e
gat
s
:
s
e
ta
i
d
e
m
r
e
t
n
i
)sraey
eerht
ega
muminim(

--- Page 111 Text ---
STAGE THREE LESSON PLAN 111
STAGE THREE LESSON PLAN
LESSON PLAN
REQUIREMENTS FOR STAGE THREE
WARM UP3–5 minutes
Minimum Age: Your child should be at least
three years old. Practice kicking and chasing a toy or kicking drills. pp56;72
Skill Level: Your child has successfully
SONG BREAK3 minutes
completed Beginners:Stages One
Incorporate vertical submersions,bubble blowing,and
and Two and Intermediates:Stages
swimming around the parent. pp39;106–07;73
One and Two,as well as the
Adaptations for Three- to Four-
WARM-UP DIPS1–2 minutes
Year Old Beginners if she started
Short dips using the technique for a held swim. pp64–65
learning to swim over the age of
36 months.She can propel herself
ACTIVITY CIRCUIT10–12 minutes total pp52–53
forward with a strong,steady kick,
Structure the circuit as shown below.Go around 3–5 times.
face submerged,holding her
a)Water Pouring Station pp46–47
breath for nine seconds,and has
mastered the Safety Sequence. b)Monkey Walk or Basketball pp77;45
c)Jump,Swim,and Turn Back to the Wall
(once per round) p105
d)Pick-a-ball Game p49
Children in this age group are great characters with
For the pass between parents use Rob’s Tai Chi Pass with
boundless energy and vivid imaginations.They love to
your child wearing fins5 times max pp92–93
chat,sing,and play games,and also like to work for
rewards—motivation and encouragement are key to LEARNING TO COME UP FOR AIR 3 minutes total
their learning.They will progress well when learning in a a)Coming Up for Air—Assisted 3–5 times max pp112–13
group environment since they love mimicking their b)Coming Up for Air—Equipment3–5 times max
peers and demonstrating their skills to their friends. pp114–15
You will find that by now your child is a good
FRONTFLOATING 1–2 minutes
swimmer,can link together skills in a sequence,and her
Front Floating1–3 times max p116
coordination has greatly improved due to her physical
development.As she can now kick well and spend a
BACKFLOATINGANDSWIMMING 1–2 minutes
significant amount of time underwater,she can progress
Start with i),below,then progress to ii),then finally to iii).
to more complicated skills such as floating.
i) Back Floating 1–2 times max p117
Skills such as Coming Up for Air (see pp112–13) and
ii) Swimming on the Back 2–3 times max pp118–19
Back Floating (see p117) take time and patience to
iii) 180º Roll During a Swim 3–5 times max pp120–21
successfully master.Never force breathing or floating
DIVING FOR RINGS 2 minutes pp122–23
skills,and gradually introduce back floating based on
your child’s ever-increasing levels of relaxation,trust,and THE SAFETY SEQUENCE2 minutes pp108–09
readiness.It may take months to accomplish these skills,
BALANCE or RUN AND JUMP3–5 minutes pp68;51
but once acquired,they offer your child increased
mobility and safety in the water. TIME TO GO1 minute p69

--- Page 112 Text ---
112 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
COMING UP FOR
TEACHING TIPS
AIR—ASSISTED
Starting this skill at too young an
age results in your child swimming
vertically in the water,which is
Once a child learns to come up for a breath,he will be able to
frustrating for him and exhausting.
swim for longer,resurfacing again and again as he explores the Supporting your child at the waist
or hips creates a fulcrum that
pool.Surfacing for a breath takes several months to fully achieve,
prompts him to move his arms and
but with time and practice,and your instructions in the correct hands forward and raise his head.
technique,he will gain a new freedom in the water.
FIRST LEVEL
Stand in chest-deep water,with your partner 15 feet him up for a breath.Facing your child,the receiver
(4.5 m) ahead of you.Hold your child in the Pass Hold should take an audible gulp of air and then close his
(see p43) and cue him to go underwater.As his face mouth while you say,“Take a breath.”Listen to check
enters the water,release him and walk along beside him. that your child has taken a breath,then continue to
At the end of his usual breath holding (by now up to swim him underwater to the receiver,who should pick
10 seconds),slip your hands under his armpits and lift him up and praise him.Practice for at least six lessons.

--- OCR from Page 112 Image 1 ---
— be Wee OPE NN ae

Al R. ASSISTEDD Starting this skill at too young an
age results in your child swimming
vertically in the water which is
Once a child learns to come up for a breath, he will be able to frustrating for him and exhausting,

swim for longer, resurfacing again and again as he explores the Supporting your child at the waist

. . hi tes a ful that

pool. Surfacing for a breath takes several months to fully achieve, ee eg
prompts him to move his arms and

but with time and practice, and your instructions in the correct hands forward and raise his head.

technique, he will gain a new freedom in the water.

FIRST LEVEL

Stand in chest-deep water, with your partner 15 feet him up for a breath. Facing your child, the receiver
(4.5 m) ahead of you. Hold your child in the Pass Hold should take an audible gulp of air and then close his
(see p43} and cue him to go underwater. As his face mouth while you say, “Take a breath.” Listen to check
enters the water, release him and walk along beside him. — that your child has taken a breath, then continue to
At the end of his usual breath holding (by now up to swim him underwater to the receiver, who should pick

10 seconds), slip your hands under his armpits and lift him up and praise him. Practice for at least six lessons.

--- OCR from Page 112 Image 2 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Starting this skill at too young an
age results in your child swimming
vertically in the water which is
frustrating for him and exhausting.

Supporting your child at the waist
or hips creates a fulcrum that
prompts him to move his arms and

hands forward and raise his head.

--- OCR from Page 112 Image 3 ---
Supporting your child at the waist
or hips creates a fulcrum that
prompts him to move his arms and
hands forward and raise his head.

. Facing your child, the receiver

ble gulp of air and then close his
y,“Take a breath.” Listen to check
taken a breath, then continue to
er to the receiver, who should pick
lim. Practice for at least six lessons.

--- Page 113 Text ---
COMING UP FOR AIR—ASSISTED 113
SECOND LEVEL
Once your child takes a breath every time you
lift him in the first level,let him try to lift his
own head out of the water.Follow the first
level,but at his usual breath-taking point,place
your hands at his waist.Your child can lean his
torso onto your hands to give him leverage,
paddle his hands,arch his back,lift his chin up
out of the water,and take a breath.He can
then submerge his head again,and continue his
swim.Initially,you may need to tilt your wrists
upward to help him come up for a breath.
Practice for at least six lessons.
THIRD LEVEL FOURTH LEVEL
Once your child is competent at the second level,move Once your child is confident at the third level,move
your hands down from his waist to his hips.This alters your hands to your child’s thighs so that you are
the amount of leverage he has,making him push harder providing even less leverage and he needs to push
on the water with his hands to raise his head for air. even harder to come up for air.Practice for at least
Practice for at least six lessons. the next six lessons.

--- OCR from Page 113 Image 1 ---
REET NE NR ERE EN AON SEE EEN MEE ROR REE

torso onto your hands to give him leverage,
paddle his hands, arch his back, lift his chin up
out of the water, and take a breath. He can
then submerge his head again, and continue his
swim. Initially, you may need to tilt your wrists
upward to help him come up for a breath.
Practice for at least six lessons.

THIRD LEVEL FOURTH LEVEL
Once your child is competent at second level, move Once your child is confident at the third level, moy
your hands down from his waist to his hips. This alters your hands to your child’s thighs so that you are
the amount of leverage he has, making him push harder providing even less leverage and he needs to push
on the water with his hands to raise his head for air. even harder to come up for air. Practice for at least

Practice for at least six lessons. the next six lessons.

--- OCR from Page 113 Image 2 ---
COMING UP FOR AIR—ASSISTE

SECOND LEVEL

Once your child takes a breath ever

lift him in the first level, let him try
own head out of the water. Follow t
level, but at his usual breath-taking |
your hands at his waist. Your child
torso onto your hands to give him
paddle his hands, arch his back, lift ]
out of the water, and take a breath.
then submerge his head again, and
swim. Initially, you may need to tilt )
upward to help him come up for a |
Practice for at least six lessons.

--- Page 114 Text ---
114 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
COMING UP FOR
TEACHING TIPS
AIR—EQUIPMENT
If you are practicing alone,you can
adapt the third option by using the
wall to support one end of the
Mastering the skill of surfacing for air takes months of practice,
noodle.If you are in a group,you
can make things easier by holding
but if you wish,you can use equipment and toys to improve
equipment for each other.
technique and body position and motivate your child.Hoops and
Prompt your child with the phrase:
noodles provide a focus,while fins and barbells allow your child “Take a breath,eyes in,big kicks!”
to experience a new skill before he perfects it.
FIRST OPTION
Stand facing your child in waist-deep water,with a barbell
between you.Ask your child to hold the barbell with both
hands and straight arms.Tell him to take a breath,then
gently place his face in the water.Walk backward as
your child swims the barbell toward you.Tap the
crown of his head and take a deep breath to
encourage him to mimic you and breathe in,
then tell him,“put your eyes in and splash with
your feet.”At the start,you may need to tow
the barbell or add fins for greater propulsion,
and to assist with the head lift.

--- OCR from Page 114 Image 1 ---
INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE

IMING UP FOR
R—EQUIPMENT

ring the skill of surfacing for air takes months of practice,
you wish, you can use equipment and toys to improve
ique and body position and motivate your child. Hoops and

es provide a focus, while fins and barbells allow your child

derience a new skill before he perfects it.

~ OPTION

facing your child in waist-deep water, with a barbell
nn you. Ask your child to hold the barbell with both
and straight arms. Tell him to take a breath, then
place his face in the water. Walk backward as

hild swims the barbell toward you. Tap the

of his head and take a deep breath to

rage him to mimic you and breathe in,

ell him,“put your eyes in and splash with

eet.” At the start, you may need to tow

rbell or add fins for greater propulsion,

-assist with the head lift.

TEACHING TIPS

If you are practicing alone, you can
adapt the third option by using the
wall to support one end of the
noodle. If you are in a group, you
can make things easier by holding
equipment for each other.

Prompt your child with the phrase:
“Take a breath, eyes in, big kicks!’

--- OCR from Page 114 Image 2 ---
Se, irr.

technique and body position and motivate your child. Hoops and
Prompt your chi

noodles provide a focus, while fins and barbells allow your child “Take a breath, €

to experience a new skill before he perfects it.

FIRST OPTION

Stand facing your child in waist-deep water, with a barbell
between you. Ask your child to hold the barbell with both
hands and straight arms. Tell him to take a breath, then
gently place his face in the water. Walk backward as

your child swims the barbell toward you. Tap the

crown of his head and take a deep breath to

encourage him to mimic you and breathe in,

then tell him,“put your eyes in and splash with

your feet.” At the start, you may need to tow

--- OCR from Page 114 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

If you are practicing alone, you can
adapt the third option by using the
wall to support one end of the
noodle. If you are in a group, you
can make things easier by holding
equipment for each other.

Prompt your child with the phrase:
“Take a breath, eyes in, big kicks!’

--- Page 115 Text ---
COMING UP FOR AIR—EQUIPMENT 115
SECOND OPTION
Stand in waist- to chest-deep water opposite your partner,
10–12 feet (3–3.6 m) apart.Your partner should have a
puppet.Tell your child,“When the puppet is up,you are
up;when it is down,you are down.”With your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43) cue him to go underwater and,
as your partner places the puppet underwater,swim your
child to your partner.Follow your child—after a few
seconds your partner should raise the puppet out of the
water and your child should lift his head.Repeat until
your child reaches your partner.
THIRD OPTION
Make a bridge by holding two noodles on top of the
water,so they are 5–6 feet (1.5–1.8 m) apart.(Or make a
hoop tunnel with two hoops partially submerged held
5–6 feet/1.5–1.8 m apart.) Instruct your child to swim
under the first bridge,come up to take a breath in the
middle,then go under the second bridge.Initially,your
partner may need to help him to come up by using the
different leverage supports shown on pages 112–13.

--- OCR from Page 115 Image 1 ---
COMING UP FOR AIR—EQUIPMENT 115

SECOND OPTION

Stand in waist- to chest-deep water opposite your partner
10-12 feet (3—3.6 m) apart. Your partner should have a
puppet. Tell your child,“When the puppet is up, you are
up; when it is down, you are down.” With your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43) cue him to go underwater and,

— os *

as your partner places the puppet underwater, swim your
child to your partner. Follow your child—after a few
seconds your partner should raise the puppet out of the
water and your child should lift his head. Repeat until
your child reaches your partner.

ly

THIRD OPTION

Make a bridge by holding two noodles on top of the
water, so they are 5—6 feet (1.5—1.8 m) apart. (Or make a
hoop tunnel with two hoops partially submerged held
5—6 feet/1.5—1.8 m apart.) Instruct your child to swim
under the first bridge, come up to take a breath in the
middle, then go under the second bridge. Initially, your
partner may need to help him to come up by using the
different leverage supports shown on pages [12—13.

--- OCR from Page 115 Image 2 ---
site your partner,
should have a

t is up, you are

. your child in
nderwater and,
water, swim your
—after a few
Ippet out of the
. Repeat until

COMING UP FOR AIR—EQUIPMENT

115

--- Page 116 Text ---
116 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
FRONT AND BACK
TEACHING TIPS
FLOATING
Let your child hold a toy,recite the
alphabet,or count to occupy and
relax her while she is floating.
Floating,which should be done with free will,not imposed,
Technique is not as important as
requires experience and trust.We have always introduced floating
the fact your child is relaxed.
to our most experienced swimmers who are totally relaxed and in By watching someone else float—a
parent,sibling,or peer—your child
harmony with the water,rather than to younger,less competent
is more likely to try this skill.
swimmers who may be alarmed by these new positions.
FLOATING ON THE FRONT
1 While you hold your child,ask your partner to
demonstrate a front float.Point out to your child
how the knees are bent,the arms are held out with the
elbows bent,the head is looking down,and the body is
relaxed and not wiggling.
2 Stand in the Face-to-face Hold (see p43) and tell
your child that it is now her turn to front float
and that you will help her.Ask her to “take a big
breath and put your eyes in.”You can initiate this by
audibly and visibly taking a breath.Gently release your
hands from under her armpits and dangle them under
her as she floats and holds your outstretched arms.

--- OCR from Page 116 Image 1 ---
i ME acm

: t, sibling, _ hild
harmony with the water, rather than to younger, less competent lo ae
is more likely to try this skill.

swimmers who may be alarmed by these new positions.

FLOATING ON THE FRONT
While you hold your child, ask your partner to
demonstrate a front float. Point out to your child
how the knees are bent, the arms are held out with the
elbows bent, the head is looking down, and the body is
relaxed and not wiggling.

—

Stand in the Face-to-face Hold (see p43) and tell
your child that it is now her turn to front float
and that you will help her Ask her to “take a big
breath and put your eyes in.” You can initiate this by
audibly and visibly taking a breath. Gently release your
hands from under her armpits and dangle them under
her as she floats and holds your outstretched arms.

--- OCR from Page 116 Image 2 ---
2 Stand in the |
your child thé
and that you will h
breath and put you
audibly and visibly

hands from under
her as she floats ar

--- OCR from Page 116 Image 3 ---
TEACHING TIPS

Let your child hold a toy, recite the
alphabet, or count to occupy and
relax her while she is floating.

Technique is not as important as
the fact your child is relaxed.

By watching someone else float—a
parent, sibling, or peer—your child
is more likely to try this skill.

THE FRONT

our child, ask your partner to

mnt float. Point out to your child
ent, the arms are held out with the
d is looking down, and the body is
ling.

--- Page 117 Text ---
FRONT AND BACK FLOATING 117
FLOATING ON THE BACK
1 As with floating on the front,show your child how
your partner floats on his back and point out what
each part of his body is doing.Alternatively,lie your
child on his back on a large foam mat and point out
what all his body parts are doing when floating.
2Tell your child it is her turn (or time to try it in
the water if she has been floating on the mat),and
hold her facing away from you,with the sun behind
you so there is no glare.Place her cheek next to yours
and lightly touch your palm to her other cheek.Rest
her head on your shoulder while she leans back from
a vertical position.Slowly lower your shoulder to the
water so the back of her head touches the water (this
way she won’t feel like she is falling).Place your free
hand in the small of her back for support.Point out
how key body parts should be positioned:“Look back
at me,head back,chin to the sky,tummy up,palms up
catching sun,arms and legs relaxed,no wiggling.”
Practice 2–3 times per lesson.

--- OCR from Page 117 Image 1 ---
FLOATING ON THE BACK
As with floating on the front, show your child how
your partner floats on his back and point out what
each part of his body is doing. Alternatively, lie your
child on his back on a large foam mat and point out
what all his body parts are doing when floating.

FRONT AND BACK FLOATING 117

Tell your child it is her turn (or time to try it in
the water if she has been floating on the mat), and
hold her facing away from you, with the sun behind
you so there is no glare. Place her cheek next to yours
and lightly touch your palm to her other cheek. Rest
her head on your shoulder while she leans back from
a vertical position. Slowly lower your shoulder to the
water so the back of her head touches the water (this
way she won't feel like she is falling). Place your free
hand in the small of her back for support. Point out
how key body parts should be positioned: “Look back
at me, head back, chin to the sky, tummy up, palms up
catching sun, arms and legs relaxed, no wiggling.”
Practice 2—3 times per lesson.

--- OCR from Page 117 Image 2 ---
FRONT AND BACK FLOATING 117

ATING ON THE BACK

s with floating on the front, show your child how
Ur partner floats on his back and point out what
part of his body is doing. Alternatively, lie your

on his back on a large foam mat and point out
all his body parts are doing when floating.

Tell your child it is her turn (or time to try it in
the water if she has been floating on the mat), and

--- Page 118 Text ---
118 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
SWIMMING ON
OBJECTIVES
THE BACK
To instill the correct body
alignment for later back swimming.
To refine the kick movement—it
Being able to swim on his back means that your child will always
becomes more hip-generated in
be able to breathe—a very important safety skill.Children who this position,with straighter legs
and the feet just below the surface.
are relaxed and ready for this new skill find this novel position,
To establish the foundation for
with their mouth and eyes out of the water,a fun new way to
backstroke and freestyle drills.
move in the pool,so expect lots of giggling.
FIRST LEVEL
Play a game of “Tugboat and Ocean Liner,”where head,saying,“Be a strong tugboat and push me into
your child is the tugboat and you the liner.Stand port.”Walk backward slowly as he kicks and maintains
behind your child and position him on his back, contact with your chest,pushing against you.Tell him
holding a barbell at his waist so he can hold it and to look you in the eyes as he kicks,giving him
touch it to his belly button.His head should touch frequent prompts:“Head back,tummy up,push me,
your chest.Instruct your child to push you with his little kicks.”Praise him for being a strong tugboat.

--- OCR from Page 118 Image 1 ---
THE BACK

Being able to swim on his back means that your child will always
be able to breathe—a very important safety skill. Children who
are relaxed and ready for this new skill find this novel position,
with their mouth and eyes out of the water, a fun new way to

move in the pool, so expect lots of giggling.

o instill the correct body

alignment for later back swimming.

tl

o refine the kick movement—it

becomes more hip-generated in

his position, with straighter legs

and the feet just below the surface.

o establish the foundation for

backstroke and freestyle drills.

FIR levee

Play a game of “Tugboat and Ocean Liner,’ where head, saying,“Be a strong tugboat and push me into
your child is the tugboat and you the liner. Stand port.” Walk backward slowly as he kicks and maintains
behind your child and position him on his back, contact with your chest, pushing against you. Tell him
holding a barbell at his waist so he can hold it and to look you in the eyes as he kicks, giving him

touch it to his belly button. His head should touch frequent prompts:“Head back, tummy up, push me,

your chest. Instruct your child to push you with his little kicks.” Praise him for being a strong tugboat.

--- OCR from Page 118 Image 2 ---
OBJECTIVES

To instill the correct body
alignment for later back swimming.

To refine the kick movement—{t
becomes more hip-generated in
this position, with straighter legs
and the feet just below the surface.

To establish the foundation for

backstroke and freestyle drills.

--- Page 119 Text ---
SWIMMING ON THE BACK 119
SECOND LEVEL
1 Once your child is happy playing
“Tugboat,”try playing the game
of “Food Delivery.”Stand 3–4 feet
(90–120 cm) opposite your partner.
Ask your child to name her favorite
snack,then position her so she is
floating on her back,and place the
imaginary snack on her stomach.
Tell her,“deliver the snack [to the
receiver],but keep your tummy up
so it doesn’t get soggy.”
2 Gently launch your child on her back to the and enjoy it.For variety,you can also have your child
receiver using a slight push forward—one hand push off the wall with her feet and gently glide on her
should gently push under her back and the other back toward you with her tummy up.She can then
hand should push her feet.Prompt her:“Tummy up! share the imaginary snack with you.
Kick! Keep the snack dry!”When she gets to the
receiver,they can share the snack,pretending to munch

--- OCR from Page 119 Image 1 ---
a

2 Gently launch your child on her back to the
receiver using a slight push forward—one hand
should gently push under her back and the other
hand should push her feet. Prompt her:“Tummy up!
Kick! Keep the snack dry!” When she gets to the
receiver, they can share the snack, pretending to munch

SWIMMING ON THE BACK 119

SECOND LEVEL
1 Once your child is happy playing
“Tugboat,’ try playing the game
of “Food Delivery.” Stand 3—4 feet
(90-120 cm) opposite your partner.
Ask your child to name her favorite
snack, then position her so she is
floating on her back, and place the
imaginary snack on her stomach.
Tell her, “deliver the snack [to the
receiver], but keep your tummy up
so it doesn’t get soggy.”

and enjoy it. For variety, you can also have your child
push off the wall with her feet and gently glide on her
back toward you with her tummy up. She can then
share the imaginary snack with you.

--- OCR from Page 119 Image 2 ---
SWIMMING ON THE BAC

SECOND LEVEL
1 Once your child is hai
“Tugboat,’ try playing

of “Food Delivery” Stand

(90-120 cm) opposite yo
Ask your child to name |
snack, then position her :
floating on her back, and
imaginary snack on her s
Tell her, “deliver the snack
receiver], but keep your t
so it doesn’t get soggy.”

--- Page 120 Text ---
120 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
180º ROLL DURING
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
A SWIM
To teach a 180°rolling technique
from prone to supine and supine
to prone.
Changing orientation during a swim creates a new way to take
To encourage taking a breath
a breath.For an experienced back swimmer,this is another before rolling into the water.
important safety skill.To make this technique fun for your child To associate a command (“hot
dog!”) with the action of rolling.
to learn,pretend he is a hot dog,pouring imaginary mustard and
If your child is on your left-hand
ketchup all over him,then saying “hot dog!”when you want your
side,simply reverse the directions.
child to roll and wash it all off.
FIRST LEVEL
1 Tell your child,“We’re going to roll you over and 2 Now that he is on his back,you and the receiver
put ketchup and mustard on you like a hot dog.” should “squirt”your child with the imaginary
Standing in chest-deep water,8 feet (2.4 m) opposite sauces,then tell him that you’re going to wash it all off.
your partner,place your child in the Pass Hold Hold your child on his back on your right-hand side
(see p43) on your right-hand side.Cue him to go with your left arm under his back and your left hand
underwater and,as he swims,walk along with him, holding his far armpit.Your right hand should hold
keeping your hands on him.When he almost reaches him under his nearest armpit.Begin a held swim and
the receiver,say “hot dog!”and roll him toward you then say,“hot dog!”To turn him,pull your left hand
with your right hand,pushing him gently away from toward you and push your right hand away from you,
you with your left hand.He will roll 180°,bringing his rolling your child so his face is in the water,then rolling
face to the surface. him back up again after a few seconds.

--- OCR from Page 120 Image 1 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

‘To teach a 180° rolling technique
from prone to supine and supine
to prone.

To encourage taking a breath
before rolling into the water

To associate a command (“hot
dog’) with the action of rolling.

If your child is on your left-hand
side, simply reverse the directions.

A

--- OCR from Page 120 Image 2 ---
FIRST LEVEL

| Tell your child,“We're going to roll you over and
put ketchup and mustard on you like a hot dog.”

Cone Sim ew te ee ne Jnr urréerntr OF Lane (OA wee) eee sien

--- OCR from Page 120 Image 3 ---
Il you over and 2 Now that he is on his back, you and the receiver
like a hot dog.”
?.4m) opposite sauces, then tell him that you’re going to wash it all off.

should “squirt” your child with the imaginary

--- Page 121 Text ---
180º ROLL DURING A SWIM 121
SECOND LEVEL
1 Once your child is confident with the assisted 2 Repeat step one,but with your child swimming on
rolls in the first level,you can let him try rolling his front.Cue your child to go underwater and
himself.Stand in chest-deep water opposite your launch him for an unaided swim.Just before he reaches
partner,8 feet (2.4 m) apart,holding your child so the receiver say “hot dog!”which should cue him to roll
that he is floating on his back.Gently launch your onto his back.
child to the receiver using a slight push forward.Just Once your child is confident performing unaided
before he reaches the reciever,say “hot dog!”This single rolls,he can start doing a roll-and-return cycle,
should cue him to roll over into a prone position first rolling one way from his front to his back,then
on his front and finish swimming to the receiver. taking a breath and rolling back the same way onto his
front before reaching the receiver.

--- OCR from Page 121 Image 1 ---
Once your child is confident with the assisted

rolls in the first level, you can let him try rolling
himself. Stand in chest-deep water opposite your
partner, 8 feet (2.4 m) apart, holding your child so
that he is floating on his back. Gently launch your
child to the receiver using a slight push forward. Just
before he reaches the reciever, say “hot dog!” This
should cue him to roll over into a prone position
on his front and finish swimming to the receiver.

Repeat step one, but with your child swimming on

his front. Cue your child to go underwater and
launch him for an unaided swim. Just before he reaches
the receiver say “hot dog!” which should cue him to roll
onto his back.

Once your child is confident performing unaided
single rolls, he can start doing a roll-and-return cycle,
first rolling one way from his front to his back, then
taking a breath and rolling back the same way onto his

front before reaching the receiver.

--- Page 122 Text ---
122 INTERMEDIATES: STAGE THREE
DIVING FOR RINGS
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS
To teach your child to perform a
One of the most thrilling rites of passage for a young swimmer is
dive and swim at a diagonal angle.
gaining the ability to perform a surface dive and retrieve a ring
On the deck,get your child to
practice a forward bend at the waist
or toy off the bottom of the pool.Not only does this skill
and learn the phrase “Swim,bow,
promote the ability to navigate underwater—thus increasing splash the sky,kick for the ring.”
comfort and safety in the water—it also fosters self-esteem.
FIRST LEVEL
1 Tell your child to “kick hard”to the bottom,grab 2 Your child should swim down toward the pool
the ring,and “kick hard”to come up.Drop a dive floor,grab the ring when it is within her reach,
ring at a depth of 3–31/2 feet (90–105 cm),then stand push off the pool floor and look upward toward the
back at a diagonal angle to it.Holding your child in surface,angling her body for the ascent.She will
the Pass Hold (see p43),cue her to go underwater. return upward either by floating up or by kicking.
Submerge her by giving her a slight push diagonally She may try both tactics and then develop a preference
and down,then release her. for using one of them.

--- OCR from Page 122 Image 1 ---
OBJECTIVES AND TIPS

To teach your child to perform a
dive and swim at a diagonal angle.

On the deck, get your child to
practice a forward bend at the waist

and learn the phrase ‘Swim, bow,
splash the sky, kick for the ring.’

--- OCR from Page 122 Image 2 ---
promote the ability to navigate underwater—thus increasing

comfort and safety in the water—it also fosters self-esteem.

FIRST LEVEL

1 Tell your child to “kick hard” to the bottom, grab
the ring, and “kick hard” to come up. Drop a dive
ring at a depth of 3~—3!/2 feet (70-105 cm), then stand
back at a diagonal angle to it. Holding your child in
the Pass Hold (see p43}, cue her to go underwater.

2 Your
floot
push off 1

surface, at
return up

--- OCR from Page 122 Image 3 ---
/ does this sKIli —— ae. en i.

and learn the phrase ‘Swim, bow,

—thus increasing splash the sky, kick for the ring.’

ters self-esteem.

sT

Malet

rab

ive
stand

lly

2 Your child should swim down toward the pool
floor, grab the ring when it is within her reach,

push off the pool floor and look upward toward the
surface, angling her body for the ascent. She will

return upward either by floating up or by kicking.

She may try both tactics and then develop a preference
for using one of them.

--- Page 123 Text ---
DIVING FOR RINGS 123
3 As your child returns to the surface,catch her SECOND LEVEL
and praise her for a job well done.Practice this Once your child is confident at the first level,withdraw
sequence several times per lesson. your assistance gradually by decreasing the strength
of your push and encouraging your child to “put your
head down and kick,”initiating a jackknife or pike
position.She may eventually propel herself using both
arms to bring her down.You can also sink multiple
rings to lengthen the time spent maneuvering
underwater and thus increase her lung capacity.

--- OCR from Page 123 Image 1 ---
DIVING FOR RINGS 123

3 As your child returns to the surface, catch her SECOND LEVEL
and praise her for a job well done. Practice this Once your child is confident at the first level, withdraw
sequence several times per lesson. your assistance gradually by decreasing the strength

of your push and encouraging your child to “put your
head down and kick,’ initiating a jackknife or pike
position. She may eventually propel herself using both
arms to bring her down. You can also sink multiple

= rings to lengthen the time spent maneuvering

: = ra a and thus increase her lung capacity. a

--- Page 124 Text ---
124 RESOURCES
RESOURCES
ORGANIZATIONS
American Red Cross and Canadian Red Cross World Aquatic Babies Congress
Run courses teaching water safety,health,and first aid. Founded by Virginia Hunt Newman,focuses on aquatic
www.redcross.org and www.redcross.ca programs for babies,toddlers,and young children.
www.waterbabies.org email:WABC@waterbabies.org
International Swimming Hall of Fame
Aquatic museum,library,and bookstore. YMCA US andYMCA Canada
Promotes water safety initiatives. Provides information on swimming
www.ishof.org programs and safety..
www.ymca.net and www.ymca.ca
Lifestyle Swim School
Founded by Rob and Kathy McKay,organizes swim
lessons,parent workshops,teacher training and
workshops,and teacher referrals.Creators and suppliers
of “Diaper Dolphins”video series for parents.
www.babyswimming.com
email:babyswimschool@aol.com
National Spa and Pool Institute (NSPI)
Furthers pool safety,health,and education.
www.nspi.org
Swimming Cananda
Provides links to provincial swimming organizations.
www.swimming.ca
United States Swim School Association
Promotes aquatic safety,health,and fun.
www.usswimschools.org

--- OCR from Page 124 Image 1 ---
RESOURCES

ORGANIZATIONS

American Red Cross and Canadian Red Cross World Aquatic Babies Congress

Run courses teaching water safety, health, and first aid. Founded by Virginia Hunt Newman, focuses on aquatic
www.redcross.org and www.redcross.ca programs for babies, toddlers, and young children.

www.waterbabies.org email: WABC @ waterbabies.org
International Swimming Hall of Fame

Aquatic museum, library, and bookstore. YMCA US and YMCA Canada
Promotes water safety initiatives. Provides information on swimming
www.ishof.org programs and safety.

www.ymca.net and www.ymca.ca
Lifestyle Swim School

Founded by Rob and Kathy McKay, organizes swim
lessons, parent workshops, teacher training and
workshops, and teacher referrals. Creators and suppliers
of “Diaper Dolphins” video series for parents.
www.babyswimming.com

email: babyswimschool@ aol.com

National Spa and Pool Institute (NSPI)
Furthers pool safety, health, and education.
www.nspi.org

Swimming Cananda =) Oe -
Provides links to provincial swimming organizations. r. 4 ae ie.

. . a a. a > ~ i
www.swimming.ca ' el ‘ al :

--- Page 125 Text ---
RESOURCES 125
SUPPLIERSOFEQUIPMENT, CLOTHES,AND TOYS
For fins,goggles,noodles,swim Paragon Aquatics Sprint Aquatics
and UV suits,water toys,and www.paragonaquatics.com www.sprintaquatics.com
other equipment,try the email:info@sprintaquatics.com
following websites: Pooltoy.com
www.pooltoy.com The-Swim-Store.com
Baby Swim Store email:info@pooltoy.com www.the-swim-store.com
www.babyswimstore.com
Recreonics Water Gear
Kiefer Swim Shop www.recreonics.com www.watergear.com
www.kiefer.com
email:esales@kiefer.com

--- OCR from Page 125 Image 1 ---
SUPPLIERS OF EQUIPMENT, CLOTHES, AND TOYS

For fins, goggles, noodles, swim
and UV suits, water toys, and
other equipment, try the
following websites:

Baby Swim Store
www.babyswimstore.com

Kiefer Swim Shop
www.kiefercom
email: esales @ kiefer.com

Paragon Aquatics
www.paragonaquatics.com

Pooltoy.com
www.pooltoy.com
email: info@ pooltoy.com

Recreonics
www.recreonics.com

Sprint Aquatics
www.sprintaquatics.com
email: info @sprintaquatics.com

The-Swim-Store.com

www.the-swim-store.com

Water Gear
www.watergearcom

--- Page 126 Text ---
126 INDEX
INDEX
A C G H I
Above-water Pass,57 Cheek Dip,58 games,32
Activity Circuit,52–3,88 Cheek Roll,59 for beginners,48–51
adapted lesson plan,79 child-centered teaching,12–17 group games,50–1
air,coming up for,112–15 classes,30 for intermediates,88
air temperature,23 climbing out water adjustment,44,45
allergies,33 exit rituals,69 goggles,27
Alligator Walk,53,85 Safety Sequence,108–9 group games,50–1
alternate pool entry,42 colds,21,33 Guided Swim to the Wall,
armbands,inflatable,32 Coming Up for Air,112–15 96–7
asthma,33 crying,20 holds,43
hoops,28–9
B D E F
Coming Up for Air,115
babies developmental stages,18–19 hoop swims,94–5
bathtime,38–9 diapers,26 hot tubs,23
development,18 disinfectants,23,32 hygiene,23
starting swimming,30,31,37 distraction techniques,45 illness,21,33
back Diving for Rings,122–3 imaginative play,19
floating on,117 “drownproofing” inoculations,33
swimming on,118–19 programs,14 Intermediate Swim to the
Balance,68 ear drops,27,33 Wall, 104
barbells,28–9 ear infections,33 intermediates,88–123
Coming Up for Air,114 exit rituals,69
J K L
Swimming on the Back,118 face
barriers,child-proof,25 Cheek Dip,58 Jacuzzis,23
basketball,45,53 Cheek Roll,59 jumping in
bathtime,36,38–9 Facial Submersions,80–1 Jump,Dip,and Swim,98–9
beginners,water confidence, pouring water on,36 Jump from the Wall,63
36–53 water adjustment,44 Jump,Swim,and Turn Back
benefits of swimming,10–11 Face-to-face Dip,62 to the Wall,105
Big Ball Splash,51 Face-to-face Hold,43 Learning to Wait,76
Blowing Bubbles,73 fears,19,44–5 Safety Sequence,108–9
body language,13 fins,27,29,94–5 Standing Step Jump,84
bonding,parent-child,10,33 first aid,25 Kicking,56
breathing First Held Underwater Swim, Kicking Drills,72
Breath-holding Cue,60 64–5 ladders,23
bubble blowing,73 First Short Swim,82–3 learning aids,28–9
Coming Up for Air,112–15 First Unaided Underwater Swim, lesson plans
introducing submersions,21 66–7 for beginners,36–7,55,71,
Swimming on the Back,118 floating,116–17 79
Turning Around Under Water, flotation devices,32 for intermediates,88–9,91,
100–1 Food Delivery game,119 103,111
bubble blowing,73 frightened children,19,44–5 London Bridge Is Falling
buoyancy swimsuits,32 Front Floating,116 Down, 50

--- Page 127 Text ---
INDEX 127
M N O S T U
Monkey Walk,52,77 safety,11,24–5 Tai Chi Pass,92–3
Motor Boat,Motor Boat,48 holds,43 teaching methods,12–17
non-swimming parents,30 pool barriers,25 “tear-free zone”,20
noodles,28 pool entry,32–3,41–2,76 temperature,23
Coming Up for Air,115 reaching for pool wall,74–5 Time to Go,69
learning balance,68 Safety Sequence,108–9 toddlers,18–19,37
otitis externa,33 in showers,39 toys,28–9,32,39
otitis media,33 showers,39 Tugboat and Ocean Liner,118
songs,32 turns
P R
bathtime,39 Safety Sequence,108–9
passes for beginners,48 Turning Around Under Water,
Above-water Pass,57 for intermediates,88 100–1
Pass Hold,43 water adjustment,44 Unaided Turn Under Water,
Rob’s Tai Chi Pass,92–3 sponge bathing,38 106–7
Pick-a-ball Game,49,53 steps,23 unaided swimming,87–9
pool wall pool entry,41 Diving for Rings,122–3
Guided Swim to the Wall, Standing Step Jump,84 First Short Swim,82–3
96–7 water adjustment,45 First Unaided Underwater
Intermediate Swim to the submersion Swim,66–7
Wall, 104 Breath-holding Cue,60 Guided Swim to the Wall,96–7
Jump from the Wall,63 Cheek Roll,59 hoop swims,94–5
Monkey Walk,52,77 Coming Up for Air,112–15 Intermediate Swim to the Wall,
reaching for and grabbing, Diving for Rings,122–3 104
74–5 Face-to-face Dip,62 Jump,Dip,and Swim,98–9
safety,33 Facial Submersions,80–1 Jump,Swim,and Turn Back to
pools First Held Underwater Swim, the Wall,105
choosing,22–3,32 64–5 180º Roll during a Swim,121
exit rituals,69 First Unaided Underwater Unaided Turn Under Water,
first trip to,40–3 Swim,66–7 106–7
pool entry,41–2 Guided Swim to the Wall,96–7 underwater swimming see
see also jumping in hoop swims,94–5 submersion
pregnancy,30 introducing,21
W
premature babies,33 Jump,Dip,and Swim,98–9
problems,20–1 Turning Around Under Water, waiting,learning to,76
puppets,coming up for air,115 100–1 wall see pool wall
Reaching for and Grabbing the Unaided Turn Under Water, Waltz Hold,43
Wall,74–5 106–7 water
reflexes,18,56 when not to,21 adjustment to,36,44–5
rewards,19 sunblock,26,27 temperature,23
rings,diving for,122–3 surfacing,112–15 water quality standards,23,32
Rob’s Tai Chi Pass,92–3 swimmer’s ear,33 Water Pouring Station,46–7,52,
rolls,180º,120–1 swimming aids,32 88
Run and Jump,51 swimsuits,26 Where Did They Go?,49

--- Page 128 Text ---
128 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
AUTHORS’ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS PUBLISHER’S ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Our heartfelt thanks go to:our parents,John and Bobbie Dorling Kindersley would like to thank all the families who
McKay and Bill and Irene Kement,for always loving us, gave their time to model for this book:Eddie and Lauren
supporting our efforts,and setting an outstanding example Ames with David and AJ;Melissa Babey with Brandon and
of good parenting;our brothers,Scott McKay and Michael Hunter;Melissa Biggs with Tiffany;Scott Bradley with Skyann;
Kement,for sharing with us happy,active,and playful Mickey and Nati Charney;Manu and Lisa Chauhan with Kai;
childhoods and lasting bonds of friendship;our daughters, Robin DeStefano with Jenna;Colette Duenkel with Teagan;
Heather and Brianne McKay,who taught us firsthand the Esther Fix with Benjamin;Kristen Gaspari with Jonas and
joys of being a parent,continue to enrich our lives with their James;Cindy Giaquinto with Jenna;Fran Janicki with Ethan;
beautiful spirits,and who encouraged us to write this book. Karen Kahane with Brianna;Keith and Stacey Kern with
Our sincere thanks also go to the “mother”of infant Elisabeth;Leimomi Lane with Kaui;Gillian Lopez with Fox;
swimming,Virginia Hunt Newman,a pioneering advocate of Heather McKay;Victoria Neil with Tyler;Luis and JB Perdomo
the gentle,positive approach to teaching babies to swim,for with Sofia;Cherly Price with Danny;Candace Pritchard with
her friendship,inspiration,insight,ethics,and vision;Chuck Carson;Hervé and Sylvia Rivere with Lily;Becky Schmidt with
Gaspari,our friend and attorney,whose counsel,motivation, Slade;Irena Scroggie with Nicole and Sophia;Karen and Jim
and foresight helped us throughout the writing,publishing,and Shields with Joshua;Danté Sigona;Joshua and Kinga Snowhorn
marketing process;the entire DK team whose dedicated efforts with Alma and Luca;Regina and Charles Stabile with Adrianna;
and skill brought this book into being;Steve Graves,founder Terri Stetz with Jacklyn Lipp;Stephanie Welch with Gavin.
of the National Swim School Association and executive
director of the World Aquatic Baby Congress for his vast Dorling Kindersley would also like to thank photographer Zena
knowledge of swimming,his always wise and insightful Holloway,her assistant Vanessa Sherry,and make-up artist Kim
comments,and for his support and enthusiasm over the years; Allegra;the Great Little Trading Company for the loan of props;
longtime friends John Spannuth,founder of the United States Florida Atlantic University and Art and Irena Scroggie for the use
Water Fitness Association,Buck Dawson,founding director of of their pools;and Lavish Locations.Finally,the publisher would
the International Swimming Hall of Fame,and Bob Duenkel, like to thank John Searcy (proofreader);Hilary Bird (indexer);
curator of the ISHOF,for their steadfast encouragement; Adam Powley (jacket copywriter);Carrie Love (jacket editor);
Florida Atlantic University for the use of their pool during and Tony Chung (jacket designer).
our photo shoot;Art and Irena Scroggie for the use of their
Picture credit
home pool during our photo shoot;Vinnie Gordon of
p38:Getty images/P T Santana.
Gordon Homes for her help in scouting locations;Lauren
Glaun of Sunstoppers for so promptly coming to our rescue
with beautiful UV suits for the photo shoot.
Finally,we would like to thank the thousands of parents and
babies we have had the privilege to teach over the years who have
enriched our lives and our life’s work;and the babies and the
parents featured in this book for helping to convey to the world
the boundless joy and freedom of movement experienced when
learning to swim with a gentle,child-paced approach.
AUTHORS’BIOGRAPHY
Rob and Kathy McKay have been practising
their child-centred approach to teaching
young children to swim for over 23 years.Their
Lifestyle Swim School in Florida has international
acclaim,and they have trained teachers from around the
world in how to use their innovative methods.Rob serves on
the board of the World Aquatic Baby Congress,and has won
numerous awards for his contribution to baby swimming.

--- OCR from Page 128 Image 1 ---
2 entire DK team whose dedicated efforts with Alma and Luca; Regina and Charles Stabile with Adrianna;

book into being; Steve Graves, founder Terri Stetz with Jacklyn Lipp; Stephanie Welch with Gavin.
School Association and executive

Aquatic Baby Congress for his vast Dorling Kindersley would also like to thank photographer Zena
ng, his always wise and insightful Holloway, her assistant Vanessa Sherry, and make-up artist Kim

Ss support and enthusiasm over the years; Allegra; the Great Little Trading Company for the loan of props;
Spannuth, founder of the United States Florida Atlantic University and Art and Irena Scroggie for the use
tion, Buck Dawson, founding director of of their pools; and Lavish Locations. Finally, the publisher would
uming Hall of Fame, and Bob Duenkel, like to thank John Searcy (proofreader); Hilary Bird (indexer);

, for their steadfast encouragement; Adam Powley (jacket copywriter); Carrie Love (jacket editor);
rsity for the use of their pool during and Tony Chung (jacket designer).

-and Irena Scroggie for the use of their

r photo shoot; Vinnie Gordon of

er help in scouting locations; Lauren

, for so promptly coming to our rescue

ts for the photo shoot.

e to thank the thousands of parents and

: privilege to teach over the years who have

| our life’s work; and the babies and the

s book for helping to convey to the world
freedom of movement experienced when

a gentle, child-paced approach.

Picture credit
p38: Getty images/P T Santana.

GRAPHY

y have been practising
proach to teaching

m for over 23 years. Their
in Florida has international
» trained teachers from around
their innovative methods. Rob serveSO
Id Aquatic Baby Congress, and
his contribution to baby swim