
--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
LYNNE COX

“THE GREATEST OPEN WATER SWIMMER.”
—SPORTS ILLUSTRATED

--- Page 2 Text ---
Lynne Cox was born in Boston, Massachusetts, and grew up in Los Alamitos,
California, where she presently lives. She has held open water swimming
records all over the world, including, first at age fifteen, twice setting the record
for the fastest crossing of the English Channel, for men or women. Cox was a
member of the first group of teenagers to cross the Catalina Channel in
California. She has swum the twelve-mile Øresund and the Kattegat, both
between Denmark and Sweden. Cox was the first woman to swim across the
Cook Strait in New Zealand, and the first person to swim across the Strait of
Magellan in Chile, the Beagle Channel between Argentina and Chile, Lake
Baikal in Russia, and around the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa. In 1987
Cox crossed the Bering Strait from Alaska to the Soviet Union, and in 2002
swam more than a mile in the 31-degree Fahrenheit (0.5-degree Celsius) waters
off Antarctica. Cox has been inducted into the International Swimming Hall of
Fame. She is the author of Swimming to Antarctica, Grayson, and South with the
Sun. Her articles have appeared in many publications, among them The New
Yorker and the Los Angeles Times Magazine.

--- Page 3 Text ---
ALSO BY LYNNE COX
Grayson
South with the Sun
Swimming to Antarctica

--- OCR from Page 4 Image 1 ---
Open Water
Swimming Manual

An Expert’ Survival Guide for Triathletes

ard Open Mater Swimmers

LYNNE COX

Vintage Books
4 Division of Random Howse, Ere.
Wen honk

--- Page 5 Text ---
A VINTAGE ORIGINAL, JULY 2013
Copyright © 2013 by Lynne Cox
All rights reserved. Published by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and in
Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
Vintage and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Charts and slides courtesy of the United States Navy SEALs
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Cox, Lynne.
Open water swimming manual : an expert’s survival guide for triathletes and open water swimmers / Lynne
Cox.
pages cm
eISBN: 978-0-345-80610-9
1. Long distance swimming—Training. I. Title.
GV838.53.L65C69 2013
797.2′1071—dc23 2013006165
Illustrations created by Estelle Cox
Author photograph © Ann Chatillon
www.vintagebooks.com
Cover design by Gabriele Wilson
Cover photograph © GS/Gallerystock
v3.1

--- Page 6 Text ---
To the Cadre

--- Page 7 Text ---
Excellence is an art won by training and habituation.
—Aristotle

--- Page 8 Text ---
Contents
Cover
About the Author
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph
Introduction
PART ONE: HOW TO BEGIN
Chapter 1: Beginnings
Allure of the Open Water
Expert Sources and Credentials
Chapter 2: Equipment
The Swimsuit
Swimsuit Care
Chafing
Skin Lubrication Products
Treatment for Chafing
Sunscreen Products
Sunburn Prevention
Sunburn Treatment
Goggles
Swim Caps
Wet Suits
Swim Skins
Chapter 3: Finding an Open Water Swimming Coach and Group
Finding Specific Coaches and Groups
Chapter 4: Technical Skills for Open Water Swimming

--- Page 9 Text ---
Swimming Skills Required
Breathing Drills
Head Position in the Water
Feeling the Water to Swim Faster
Chapter 5: Research
Selecting a Training Area
Scouting/Walking the Workout Course
Tidal Charts
Water Temperature
Water Quality
Food and Hydration
Chapter 6: Into the Open Water
The Stingray Shuffle
Water Entry
Bodysurfing
Waves
Surf
Role of the Tides
Swell Prediction
Moving through the Surf
Over Our Heads: Distress Signals
Riptides
Water Exit
Chapter 7: Effects of Heat and Cold
Cold Acclimatization
Hyperthermia and Hypothermia
Heat Acclimatization
Hypothermia
Ice Swimming
After-drop
Chapter 8: Sinuses and Ears
Prevention of Infections
Chapter 9: Ocean Hazards
Fog

--- Page 10 Text ---
Ships, Boats, Jet Skis, Sailor Boats, Windsurfers, Kite Surfers, and Surfers
PART TWO: BEGINNING AND INTERMEDIATE SWIMMERS
Chapter 10: Training Swims
Training Safely
Training for a Short Open Water Swim
Training for a Moderate or Long Open Water Swim
Chapter 11: Selection for Support and Swim
Skills Required for a Kayaker
Kayaker Selection
Kayaker Competency
Swimming Route
PART THREE: INTERMEDIATE AND ADVANCED SWIMMERS
Chapter 12: Open Water Swims Outside the Buoys with Boat Support
Information Gathering/Research
Selecting Support Crew
One Person on the Surface in Charge
Plan for the Swim/Mission
Briefing: Explaining the Plan
SEAL Mission Planning
Strategy
Backup Plans
Safety/Operational Risk Management
Emergency Action Plan
Completion of Swim and Rewarming
Debriefing
Further SEAL Advice When Planning a Swim
Medical Check Before Swim
Recommendations for Long Training Swims and Documentation
Chapter 13: Dangerous Marine Organisms
Research Semitropical and Tropical Waters before Swimming
Bristle Worms
Coral Reefs
Fire Coral

--- Page 11 Text ---
Jellyfish
Box Jellyfish
Leptospirosis
Seabather’s Eruption
Sea Cucumbers
Sea Urchin
Seaweed Dermatitis
Scorpion Fish
Crown-of-Thorns Starfish
Stonefish
Stingrays
Country Medicine
Swimmer’s Itch
SEALs Recommend U.S. Navy Diving Manual
Chapter 14: Sharks
Swimming with Sharks and Rays
Minds in the Water
U.S. Navy Diving Manual on Sharks
First Aid for Shark Bites
PART FOUR: ADVANCED SWIMMERS
Chapter 15: Into the Dark
Swimming in the Dark
Dark Swims and Illumination
Finding Better Illumination
Chapter 16: Seasickness
Taking Medications During a Swim
Chapter 17: Preparation
Physical Training
Mental Preparation
Chapter 18: Going In and Out of Consciousness
Deep Mind “Thing”
Sleep
Chapter 19: Motivations

--- Page 12 Text ---
Success
Success in Unsuccessful Swims
Chapter 20: The English Channel Charts, Contacts, and Pilots
Tidal Charts
You Want to Swim the English Channel?
How Do You Make Contact?
Selecting a Pilot
Chapter 21: Catalina and Other Channel Swims
The Catalina Channel Swim
The Santa Barbara Channel Swim
Finding Pilots for the Catalina Channel and Other Swims
Meeting with Pilots Before Hiring Them
Inspect the Boat Before You Swim
Before You Begin Any Channel Swim
Contact the U.S. Coast Guard
Staying Healthy
Boating Safety
Selecting Boat Support for an Organized Swim
Organized Swim Considerations
Chapter 22: Swimmer’s Utopia
Chapter 23: Stewardship of the Waters
Sources for Additional Information
Acknowledgments

--- Page 13 Text ---
Introduction
The extreme is more accessible than ever before. People who never dreamed of
venturing outside swimming pools, gyms, and manicured fields are venturing
into the open water. They are no longer content to swim mega-laps in the
swimming pool. They want to experience something new and more exciting.
They want to push themselves as far as their arms will carry them and grow
physically and mentally stronger. They want to feel what it’s like to dream big,
train hard, reach far, and, through the course of these experiences, explore the
bounds of their inner and outer worlds.
Many people are entering the open water as a healthy way of escaping the
constant noise and distractions of the world. They are slipping away from their
computers, cell phones, and the barrage of daily information, and immersing
themselves in clear blue and emerald-green waters, where they can think,
meditate, and dream.
My primary reason for writing this book is to help people of all ages who are
swimming or want to swim in the open water. I wrote it for people who already
know how to swim and who are strong and competent swimmers; who have a
background in competitive swimming; or who have experienced open water
swimming with masters swimming groups, are triathletes, or have participated in
junior lifeguard programs or are beach lifeguards.
I wanted to share my love of open water swimming with people who enjoy the
feeling of being in the water and are eager to try new experiences and
challenges. Also, for people who like to read about the outdoors, adventure, and
nature, I wanted to provide a sense of what it’s like to swim in the open water
and across channels. It’s fascinating to read other people’s journeys and learn the
lessons that they impart through their stories.
A large part of the manual is focused on our need to respect the power and
unpredictability of the open water and of nature; to understand that safety is
extremely important. Having qualified and knowledgeable support people and
reliable watercraft are essential for open water swimming.
This is a manual for swimmers and triathletes who want to learn specific
swimming skills and techniques for swimming in the open water. It will teach
you special stroke mechanics that will help you in the swimming pool and in the
open water. It also includes specific drills that will help you swim more

--- Page 14 Text ---
efficiently and safely in the open water. I’ve provided training ideas and swim
site suggestions. It includes information about ways to find open water
swimming and triathlon coaches as well as contact information for associations
that support channel swims.
The manual is divided into sections for beginning, intermediate, and advanced
open water swimmers. The information presented here is fluid, there is overlap,
and the topics are all interconnected. What applies to a beginning open water
swimmer also applies to intermediate and advanced swimmers. For example, the
steps a beginning open water swimmer would take to select a safe swimming
area are the same methods an intermediate or advanced open water swimmer
would use.
The sources of information for this manual include world experts: U.S. Navy
SEALs; scientists who specialize in the marine environment; physicians who
specialize in wilderness medicine, internal medicine, emergency medicine,
dermatology, and other medical experts; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration; the U.S. Coast Guard; current beach lifeguards, the American
Lifeguard Association, and the United States Lifeguard Association; and other
elite watermen and -women.
This book features open water swimming experiences and anecdotes from
some of the best open water swimmers in the world. There are also stories about
new open water swimmers and insights from triathletes who are currently
training and competing at all levels of triathlon.
This manual will help open water swimmers learn how to break down their
training into small segments and build upon their experiences, so that they can
enjoy the feeling of getting stronger, more competent, more confident, and go as
far as their bodies and minds enable them to go.
Just as U.S. Navy SEAL trainees use manuals to learn information pertinent to
becoming U.S. Navy SEALs, they must also work with elite SEAL instructors
who help them reach the high goal of becoming a SEAL (see Sources for website
address; this page). Similarly, this manual will give you the background
knowledge to help you swim in the open water, but like the SEAL trainees, you
need to train and to work with knowledgeable and qualified open water
swimming coaches and/or triathlete coaches, or experienced and successful open
water swimmers who can watch you swim on a daily basis, help you keep track
of your progress, and help you improve. Although open water swimming is
thought of as a solo sport, to really excel, you rely upon a team to help you
achieve your goals. And if you train with a group, you may find that it’s even
more fun: a place where you give and gain inspiration and have longtime
friendships.

--- Page 15 Text ---
At this time, a directory for open water swimming coaches does not exist, but
there are well-established open water swim clubs and open water swimmers who
provide a way to network and find a coach to help with your open water
swimming. See Chapter 3 for guidelines for finding a coach and a team or club
in your area.
When swimmers enter the open water, they begin their own water journeys.
They are no longer swimming in a controlled area; they are entering a wild
world where everything is constantly changing. Heraclites, the Greek
philosopher, wrote, “You cannot step in the same river twice.”
You will also discover that you cannot swim in the same river twice, and that
is what makes the sport of open water swimming so exciting. Each swim is
different—the way the water feels, the way it looks, the way you feel when you
move through it. Each swim provides a different, often fascinating and
sometimes life-altering experience.
You will find that as you spend more time in the open water, the experience
becomes addictive in a good way, often a highlight of your day. Enjoy the water,
time with friends, time to gain strength, and time to float and think and dream of
near and distant horizons.

--- Page 16 Text ---
Open Water Swimming Manual

--- OCR from Page 17 Image 1 ---
PART ONE

How to Begin

--- Page 18 Text ---
Beginnings

--- OCR from Page 18 Image 1 ---
Chapter 1
A SS. as

--- Page 19 Text ---
ALLURE OF THE OPEN WATER
Oceans, lakes, rivers, ponds, and streams are some of the most beautiful places
on earth to swim. Nothing compares with breaking free from the confines of a
swimming pool and swimming in salty or sweet waters, as far as your arms will
carry you. You are immediately lifted by the water, bounced by the waves, and
massaged by the movement of your body through the water.
You feel sunshine warming your back, see shafts of sunlight illuminate the
water below, hear the song of the wind and the waves, and as you swim, you
hear the rhythms of your hands and feet as they catch and move water. You hear
the music of your body and your breath as the wind, current, swell, and tide
change, and the sounds of your body changing with it. You are immersed in this
water song, and each day it is different.
Each day is a great adventure. You never know what you will experience until
you get in and swim.
For forty years I have swum in the open water. At age fourteen I swam across
the Catalina Channel and, at age fifteen, broke the men’s and women’s world
records for the English Channel. Since then, I’ve completed sixty challenging
open water swims—some were world-record swims, others were firsts, and all
offered unique, exciting, and interesting challenges.
The sport of open water swimming is exploding like jogging did in the 1970s
in the United States and Britain. There are more than nine hundred competitive
open water swims across the United States throughout the year. There is a
booming business in swim travel, in which swimmers travel to beautiful and
exotic places like Greece, Turkey, and the Caribbean and participate in open
water camps and swim along shore, between islands, and across straits.
The reason for this phenomenal growth in the sport may be because triathlon
and open water swimming have gained Olympic status, since 2000 and 2008,
respectively. According to the Sporting Goods Manufacturers Association
(SGMA), an estimated 2.3 million people completed a triathlon in 2010, an
increase of 55 percent from the year before, and the New York Triathlon sold out
in eleven minutes despite an entry fee of just shy of nine hundred dollars (see
Sources for more information; this page).
Thomas Johnson, former president and current open water swim director of
the Triathlon Club of San Diego (see Sources for website address; this page), has
watched this amazing growth and was involved with organizing the 2012 ITU
World Triathlon San Diego, which served as the second qualifier for the 2012

--- Page 20 Text ---
U.S. Olympic Triathlon team. He predicted that the sport would expand even
more after the Olympic qualifying event and Olympic Games.
John Martin, the communications and media relations manager at USA
Triathlon, said there were 122,388 USA Triathlon members in 2000, and by 2012
there were 636,335 members. Martin said:
There are many reasons such as: society’s interest in fitness and living
a healthy lifestyle, the growth of the number of total races across the
country, making events easier to get to, the growth in the number of
the more accessible shorter sprint distance races, which made the sport
more accessible to those with fewer hours to train each week, growth
in the 30–49 age groups who are looking for varied outlets for fitness,
an increase in the number of USA Triathlon clubs, which fosters a
community concept for men and especially women who enjoy the
group training and support atmosphere, an increase in resources
(websites, books, magazines) that provide assistance/education in
getting started, growth in multisport shops and triathlon-specific
training and racing gear, marketing and communications efforts of
USA Triathlon, the growth in the number of USA Triathlon certified
coaches who are able to provide training plans and individual attention
for athletes who need guidance and motivation, and USA Triathlon–
sanctioned 4,300 multisport events in 2011.
This enormous expansion of triathlon has had a huge impact on the growth of
open water because swimming is one of the races included in the triathlon. There
has been a dramatic increase in media visibility and interest in both triathlon and
open water swimming. Young swimmers are also participating in the sport,
especially those who have been involved in junior lifeguard programs. Some
university and college swimming coaches are incorporating open water swims
during long-distance winter training sessions, to give the athletes a break from
swimming thousands of mind-numbing meters in the pool. The swimmers are
enjoying the challenge of swimming in the wild blue waters. Young and older
swimmers who have spent years of their lives swimming back and forth in pools
are reading books and magazines about open water swimming and triathlons and
are inspired to swim in untamed water. They want to train, set open water
swimming goals, and discover ways to make the extreme environment of the
open water accessible for themselves.
Last year there were record numbers of people swimming the English Channel
(between England and Europe) and the Catalina Channel (between Catalina

--- Page 21 Text ---
Island and the mainland of California). The sport has become so popular that
British television now broadcasts open water swims during prime time.
What most athletes don’t realize is that open water swimming is a high-risk
sport. This lack of awareness became very apparent to me on three separate
occasions. The first occurred when a swimming friend in Laguna Beach,
California, invited me to join him for an early dip. The fog was rolling in rapidly,
reducing visibility to three hundred yards. We decided to swim only one hundred
yards out to a buoy and then back in, because the fog was growing thicker, and
we knew there was a chance of getting lost, even close to shore.
We met four triathletes, two men who had trained in the area a few times and
two women who had never swum off that beach. They were planning to swim
out to the buoy, parallel the shore, and swim toward cliffs about a half mile and
back. One of the women asked if I would join them, and I said I didn’t think it
was safe.
They were wearing wet suits and dark caps, and they set off into a rolling wall
of fog that quickly erased the sounds of their strokes and consumed them. Had
they considered what would happen to them if the fog suddenly grew thicker;
what they would do if they became separated or disoriented? Did they know how
to find their way back to shore? Did they realize that they were completely
invisible in the fog? Did they realize boaters and Jet Skiers wouldn’t be able to
see them and could easily run over them? They were oblivious to the risk they
had taken or their responsibility to ensure the safety of their group. They were
lucky they made it back without a problem.
A few weeks later, a friend who was just learning how to swim in the ocean
was swimming parallel to shore outside the surf line. He had completed his
workout and was turning in to the beach to swim to shore.
He forgot that he needed to look back to check the surf conditions. He was
completely unaware that the dark blue long bump in the ocean was a wave
growing behind him. He did not realize that this wave was a shore break. He
suddenly felt the wave rapidly lifting him higher and higher and higher, tipping
him forward and launching him into the air. He felt himself falling and the water
rushing around him and suddenly pounding him into the beach.
He closed his eyes and felt himself flipping over the falls as tons of water
crashed onto his body. He spun around and tried to find air, but the white water
filled with sand was holding him under. His head finally broke the surface for a
moment, and he gasped for a breath and tried to get his feet under him, but
another wave, just as large, crashed on him and bounced him like a basketball on
the beach.
He was submerged for what seemed like forever, but at last he planted his feet,

--- Page 22 Text ---
stood up, and stumbled toward shore. The rip created by the backwash dragged
him backward into the path of the approaching wave.
For the first time, he glanced over his shoulder and saw the next wave
cresting. He leaned forward and, using his core strength, fought the backwash,
pushed hard into the sand with feet, and staggered out of the water, coughing, his
goggles twisted on his head, sand streaming down his face, shoulders, chest,
sides, and filling his swimsuit. He looked up at his friends who had run down the
beach to help him. He waved and smiled sheepishly and said he was okay. He
understood that he could have been severely hurt in the shore break.
Shortly after that, I watched another swimmer, in his midforties, swimming
off Seal Beach, California. He was breathing only on the right side of his body,
so he was completely blind on the left. Because of this breathing pattern, he
pulled stronger with his right arm than with his left. He had no spatial awareness,
no sense of ocean navigation, and he could not see that he was swimming right
into an area of heavy boating traffic. He had no idea that he was putting himself
in danger. He was okay once he reached shore.
It was because of these events and many others that I realized there needed to
be a book for all levels of open water swimmers, including those of us who have
been swimming in the open water for years but still have so much to learn.
Scientists, physicians, lifeguards, and other experts offered to provide key
information to help swimmers become more aware of the open water
environment and to know how to handle themselves in the water.

--- Page 23 Text ---
EXPERT SOURCES AND CREDENTIALS
Even though I’d completed swims in remote parts of the world and I’d worked
with various navies and coast guards to achieve my goals, I knew that there was
so much more to know about seamanship, risk management, and other topics
connected to open water swimming.
A friend in the United States Air Force offered to put me in touch with the
U.S. Navy SEALs. The SEALs are members of the United States Naval Special
Warfare unit, or NSW, who are trained for unconventional warfare; “SEAL” is
an acronym for “sea, air, and land.” NSW is the agency that provides units to
conduct maritime special operations, since the SEALs are America’s elite
maritime force. They know more about operational risk management than
anyone; they are the experts in assessing, reducing, and mitigating risks. They
have established protocols that they abide by to ensure safety. They are experts
in seamanship, can work in teams, and know how to survive in the wildest ocean
conditions.
The SEALs welcomed me to their base in Coronado, California, to observe
their sessions with the trainees, instructors, and officers, to see the best in the
world train, to understand the way the elite force implements safety measures,
and to observe how everything is done in a completely professional way.
I was allowed to sit in during the instructors’ discussions about the trainees,
which enabled me to understand the amount of planning, discussion, and
attention to detail that goes into each training evolution, or session. They
discussed everything in precise detail: how to initiate drills and exercises, how
long each one will last, how to ensure the trainees’ safety, how often the trainees
hydrate, how frequently the metal scuba tanks sitting in the hot sun are cooled to
prevent the trainees from being burned. They reviewed how they would inspect
each trainee, what errors to check for, and the number of push-ups trainees
would do if they made a mistake. They also let me see the high-risk
documentation that ensured the trainees’ safety. Equally important, the SEALs
let me see the level of qualification required by every instructor who supervises
a training event, whether it’s something as simple as a run or as complex as a
dive.
The senior SEAL who contributed so much invaluable information, anecdotal
stories, and guidance cannot be named because he is on active duty, so I will
refer to him as L. Tadeus. His credentials are tremendously impressive. He
enlisted in the U.S. Navy, earned his commission as an officer, and spent

--- Page 24 Text ---
fourteen years working in the U.S. Navy SEAL teams—eight years operational
and six years in a high-risk training capacity, supervising almost every type of
high-risk maritime training conducted by Special Operations Forces (SOF). He
has spent three years specifically conducting physical training events, from 2-
mile to 5.5-mile (3.2-kilometer to 8.8-kilometer) swims and 4-mile (6.4-
kilometer) runs. He is a Combatant Dive Training subject matter expert;
Command Diving Officer and Diving Supervisor; Submersible Pilot/Navigator;
and Military Small Craft Operator. The SEAL is trained in all levels of
Operational Risk Management, is a Military Master Training Specialist (MTS)
9502 NEC, and has earned numerous civilian maritime certifications, up to and
including two-hundred-ton boats, and is a certified Captain Near Coastal
(International Yacht Training [IYT]).
Among L. Tadeus’s many training credentials is an additional qualification
that made a huge difference to this manual. Like other senior SEALs, he has
analyzed and investigated accidents that occurred during training. When he was
not the actual Investigating Officer, he closely followed safety mishap
investigations in cooperation with his Command Safety Manager to ensure that
appropriate lessons were learned, and he institutionalized those lessons within
the training curriculum so that no one would have to relearn them the hard way.
He offered me many helpful illustrations of dangerous swim-training scenarios.
He provided recommendations for finding support boats and people, equipment,
and methods for incorporating risk management into open water swimming. He
also gave me pearls of wisdom that he earned and learned through challenging
experiences as a SEAL, an instructor, and a leader. He shared his knowledge
generously to help open water swimmers swim safely and to help them achieve
their worthy goals.
Rick Knepper also provided invaluable information. Rick is a sixty-three-
year-old retired Navy SEAL Master Chief who has spent the past forty-five years
with the Naval Special Warfare community, both for active duty and civil
service. He has spent approximately thirty years working within the SEAL
schoolhouse, with extensive time training SEAL candidates in all fundamental
aquatic skills and surface swimming for ocean swims up to five and a half
nautical miles. Additionally, he has been an aquatics trainer for numerous
instructors’ staffs over the years and continues to fulfill this need when required.
He has revised and designed various aquatic programs with the SEAL training
pipeline and has served as an aquatics consultant with other navy organizations.
For the past twenty-five years, Rick has been swimming open water marathons.
At the age of fifty, he completed the Catalina Channel crossing and a local
twenty-four-mile sanctioned solo swim off San Diego. He is currently training

--- Page 25 Text ---
for a thirty-six-mile (57.9-kilometer) swim scheduled in 2013 off Coronado
Island.
His routine conditioning includes various open water training swims, with
several between fourteen and sixteen miles and occasionally up to twenty miles
(32.1 kilometers). A purist, he swims year-round off San Diego without a wet
suit, just a cap, goggles, and a swimsuit. He has served as the safety coordinator
on several twelve-mile (19.3-kilometer) swims and supported other open water
swimmers with their training and event goals. He contributed insights and
suggestions from many years of experience as a SEAL and as an instructor.
Visiting the SEAL base gave me the invaluable opportunity to watch the best
maritime special force unit in the world work with their trainees.
On a cool morning in March 2010 at the SEAL training base in San Diego,
California, Mark James, a SEAL instructor, invited me to join him and the
trainees in a classroom for a briefing before the trainees entered the water. The
briefing would inform the trainees what they’d be doing during their training
session and would answer any questions before they entered the water.
Mark James referred to a diagram of the swim course, beautifully drawn on a
large chalkboard. Point by point, he discussed the swim. He told the trainees the
water temperature was 58 degrees F (14.4 degrees C), that the surf was
negligible but the current to the north was strong. They would be swimming
parallel to the shore to the north for a nautical mile—two thousand yards. They
would get a strong current assistance to north, and they would need to work on
their navigation skills to hold a straight line to the buoy. Once they reached the
buoy, they would swim counterclockwise around the buoy and then back to the
base. This would be a timed swim, and they were instructed to stay within six
feet of their swim buddy, who was another trainee. They watched out for each
other.
Medical responders in a truck onshore had put a number of safety mechanisms
in place, so all the trainees had to do was focus on their training. Mark James
would be riding a Jet Ski, and there would be qualified instructors in an escort
boat alongside the swimmers. There would also be an emergency response team
on the beach, keeping pace with the swim the whole time. At some point during
the swim, the trainees would practice an emergency rescue drill. One swimmer
would be selected to simulate a swimmer in distress. The crew on the support
boat would convey to the medical responders onshore, in a truck, that there was
an emergency situation and then signal everyone involved in the training session
by using a smoke signal, or pulling smoke. The people in operations who
monitored all the training were reminded of the rescue drill and the fact that a
trainee would be pulling smoke.

--- Page 26 Text ---
When the boat and Jet Ski were in place, an instructor on the beach started the
SEAL trainees. Outfitted in wet suits, the trainees quickly entered the rusty-red
Pacific off Coronado Island, dove under small swells, and swam north using the
special combat swimmer’s stroke, a modified sidestroke, that enabled them to
reduce their splash in the water and make them far less visible than freestyle.
The group quickly became a long line of swimmers moving parallel to shore.
The escort boat and Jet Ski support crew watched to make sure they all made it
around the buoy. As they swam quickly and efficiently, the responders in trucks
monitored what was happening. All their focus was on the trainees.
When the majority of the swimmers had nearly reached the finish of the swim,
the rescue drill was initiated, with the “stricken” trainee’s buddy pulling smoke.
A white trail of smoke rose like a white line above the water and signaled the
men in the safety boat that a trainee was in trouble. The SEAL instructor on the
Jet Ski responded immediately. He moved carefully around the swimmers,
pulled up beside the swimmer who needed to be rescued, and with the help of
one other swimmer, he helped place the stricken trainee on a rescue sled. The
trainees who noticed the smoke shouted to the other swimmers to muster,
meaning they needed to get out of the water quickly and go to a designated area
where two other instructors could check their names off a list to account for
everyone.
Meanwhile, the Jet Skier came ashore through the surf and met the emergency
response team at the water’s edge. They placed the victim on a spine board,
settled him in the truck, and transported him to the medical clinic on-site. The
team timed the drill and was pleased with the rapid response. After the training
session, the instructors debriefed, or discussed, the swim with the trainees and
went over questions. It was amazing to observe how the best in the world train
and how they put safety mechanisms in place. So much that is both seen and
unseen goes into planning a training session, so that all the trainees have to
worry about is performing.
It takes a certain kind of swimmer to want to venture beyond the cement walls
and enter a world that is as different from Earth as space. It takes someone who
is looking for something more challenging, that is constantly changing, that
makes her think about how she’s being affected by the forces of nature, and how
she needs to use physical strength and mind to move through the open water.
It is a dramatic, exciting, and thrilling world, but in order to swim in the open
water, you need to be a strong, competent swimmer who can evaluate risks,
know how to mitigate them, and decide when it is safe to swim. It helps a lot if
you have swum on competitive teams or in masters programs, participated in
junior lifeguard programs, competed in triathlons, or played water polo. That is

--- Page 27 Text ---
not to say other athletes should not swim in the open water, but they need to
reach a certain level of competency before they venture into the surf, current,
and waves.
As in every sport, you need to begin with the proper equipment.

--- Page 28 Text ---
Equipment

--- OCR from Page 28 Image 1 ---
Chapter 2
a

--- Page 29 Text ---
THE SWIMSUIT
For most swimmers, the essential apparel is a swimsuit. A number of swimsuit
manufacturers have designed suits that work well for open water swimming;
these include, in alphabetical order, Adidas, AgonSwim, Arena, Nike, Speedo,
and TYR. As with running shoes, there are a variety of swimsuits to choose
from; swimsuits are cut, sewn, and fit differently, and they are available in
different materials. It is worth taking the time to find a style that fits your body
and a fabric that works best for you.
The fabric matters. Some swimmers want a swimsuit that is stretchy, some
want one that is warmer, and some want a suit that is durable. Swimsuits are
available in three basic fabrics: Lycra, polyester, and spandex, as well as blends
of these fabrics. The amount of polyester and spandex and whether the fabrics
are knitted or woven make the difference in the way the fabrics feel.
Lycra swimsuits are the thinnest and have the most stretch. Swimming in a
Lycra swimsuit feels almost as if you’re wearing nothing. The Lycra clings to
and moves with your body. The fabric allows you to feel the water.
Polyester and polyester/spandex blends are thicker, more durable, a bit
warmer, and less revealing than Lycra. They are also heavier and offer more
resistance in the water. That’s why many pool swimmers train in heavier nylon
or polyester blends and wear lighter Lycra swimsuits for competitions. Lycra
swimsuits fade, and the material breaks down more quickly than polyester
blends, but in the chlorine-free open water, all swimsuit fabrics will have longer
lives.
The most important consideration when selecting a swimsuit is fit. If a
running shoe doesn’t fit well, you’ll get blisters; if a swimsuit doesn’t fit well, it
will chafe. Salt water is very abrasive, and if you’re swimming considerable
distances in the ocean, you will be chafed. For women, the areas that chafe the
most are along the seams of the suit, around the top of the suit, under the arms,
and around the leg holes. For men, swimsuits chafe along the seams, around the
top of the suit, and around the leg holes. Unfortunately, swimsuit manufacturers
construct swimsuits with the seams on the underside of the suit instead of on the
outside.
When Laura, my younger sister, and I began open water swimming—long
before the term was used to describe long-distance ocean or freshwater
swimming—we wore tough nylon swimsuits. The seams were thick and
abrasive, and after long workouts, the seams rubbed us red and raw; eventually,

--- Page 30 Text ---
the seams cut into our skin. Clothes and Band-Aids stuck to the cuts, and when
we changed clothes, we gently peeled off the scabs and often bled.
Our father, a physician, was very concerned about infection; our mother, an
artist who was very good at sewing, suggested that we invert our swimsuits. That
way, the seams would be on the outside of the swimsuit and not up against our
skin. Her idea considerably reduced chafing along the swimsuit seams, but we
were swimming long distances, and the swimsuits still chafed.
Our mother had another solution. She took a one-inch-wide elastic strip used
to make waistbands for pants, measured around Laura’s waist and around mine,
and sewed the ends of the waistbands together and gave one to each of us. We
put on our swimsuits, pulled the waistbands over our heads to our waists, and
when we went swimming and reached deep water, we pulled off our swimsuit
straps and let the top part of the swimsuit drop down to our waists. The elastic
band kept the swimsuit from falling off, and when we completed our workouts,
we put the top of our swimsuit back on and swam in to shore.
Today swimsuits are made from softer materials, but they still chafe. Recently,
a friend in San Diego was swimming long distances in La Jolla and was getting
chafed badly by her swimsuit. She made the elastic waistband and used our
solution.

--- Page 31 Text ---
SWIMSUIT CARE
Chlorine bleaches in swimming pools quickly break down swimsuit fabrics.
Swimsuits used in the open water have much longer lives. In either case, caring
for your swimsuits will extend their lives.
~ Hand-wash the swimsuit.
~ Gently wring the water out of the swimsuit.
~ Hang-dry inside the shower, or place it where it can drip-dry.
~ While the sunshine will dry a swimsuit faster than inside the house, sunlight fades and breaks
down the swimsuit fabrics.
~ Avoid putting swimsuits in the dryer. High heat cooks the material, especially Lycra, and it will
have a very short life.
Many people who do double workouts have a couple of suits, since most
swimmers don’t like to put on a wet swimsuit for the second workout. But if you
have only one, you can wash your swimsuit with soap and water while you’re in
the shower, to save time; when you’re done, wrap your swimsuit in a towel to
absorb the moisture, then hang it to dry.

--- Page 32 Text ---
CHAFING
In addition to the chafing problems described above, men can have chafing
caused by facial hair. A beard or even the short stubble of a day’s hair growth
can chafe the shoulders and area around the neck until they are raw. Sometimes
the movement of the arms and turning the head causes chafing. This also
happens to the SEAL trainees on their long-distance swims. One friend who
swims long distances in the open water was chafed so much around his neck
from one day’s growth that a stranger stopped him and asked if he’d tried to
hang himself!
Another major area of chafing for men and women is under the arms. After
long open water swims, skin is often rubbed raw under the arms. Women’s
swimsuits also chafe a lot along the sides and may cut into the sides of the
breasts.

--- Page 33 Text ---
SKIN LUBRICATION PRODUCTS
When swimmers first swam across the English Channel, they used black axle
grease to coat their bodies, for warmth and to reduce chafing. Because of
problems with chafing, there were top female open water swimmers in the 1920s
and ’30s who swam naked. Today there are women who wear two-piece
swimsuits until they get into the water, and then they ditch their tops, hand them
over to their escort paddlers, and when they finish their workout, they put the
tops back on and swim ashore.
Lanolin, Vaseline, Bag Balm, and BodyGlide are skin lubricants that have
been used for years by open water swimmers. Some swimmers make their own
mixture of lubricants. All of them help reduce chafing. When applying them to
your skin, make sure that you wear rubber gloves or surgical gloves before
smearing your skin with the lubricants. This will prevent the lubricant from
sticking to your fingers and smearing your goggles. There’s nothing worse than
looking out through lubricant-smeared goggles for hours on end not being able
to see clearly during the swim. More than annoying, though, is a swimmer’s
inability to see the escort boat and support crew. You need to be visually
connected to both throughout the swim and be alert for any sign of danger. Little
things like having clear goggles make the difference between having an
enjoyable swim and a very frustrating one.
Lanolin, Vaseline, and body glide lubricants, and mixtures of these three, are
used most by open water swimmers, and all have advantages and disadvantages.
Lanolin
Lanolin is also known as wool wax or wool grease. Sheep’s glands secrete this
yellow waxy substance to help them shed water from their woolly coats. Lanolin
also protects their coats and skin from harsh dry and cold environments.
For years lanolin has been used in skin care products to protect, moisturize,
and beautify the skin. Certain breeds of sheep produce large amounts of lanolin.
Men and women in countries like New Zealand and Australia, who work on
sheep stations and shear hundreds of sheep, not only have strong hands from
shearing and holding down the sheep; they have super-soft hands from the
lanolin.
Once the wool is harvested, it is pressed between rollers to extract the lanolin.
For years English Channel swimmers have used lanolin to protect their skin,

--- Page 34 Text ---
reduce chafing, and keep them warm. According to William Keatinge, MD, one
of the world’s experts on hypothermia, there is no real evidence that lanolin
helps a swimmer retain a significant amount of body heat, although it does help
to reduce chafing and protect the skin.
At one time, lanolin was readily available at pharmacies worldwide, as it was
often used as a compounding agent for skin care products, but it now has to be
special-ordered from pharmacies in England or the United States. Swimmers
who use lanolin in the English Channel can find chemists in Folkestone and
Dover who sell the product.
The type of lanolin open swimmers use is a gooey substance that is a light to
medium yellow and feels like marshmallow cream. It is available in a variety of
thicknesses. Some lanolin is so thick that it is difficult to apply. Most
pharmacists in Dover and Folkestone know what kind of lanolin swimmers
require, but it helps to tell them that it should be easy to apply but thick enough
to stay on for a long time
There are drawbacks to using lanolin. It smells greasy, sweet, and musty, like
an old wet woolen sweater. Some swimmers don’t mind the smell, but if you’re
swimming beside a fishing boat, the odor of dead fish wafting by on the breeze
coupled with the heavy smell of diesel fumes from the boat’s engines that you
get whiffs of now and then, there is a good possibility that all these smells may
make you queasy. Over time, this irritant may reduce your capability.
The other major consideration is that lanolin is a substance rendered from an
animal by-product. The scent of sheep in the water may attract the wrong crowd
—large fish with teeth or marine mammals may mistake a swimmer for food.
Lanolin usually stays on a swimmer’s body so well that it can be difficult to
remove in the shower or bathtub after finishing the swim. Kevin Murphy, one of
the greatest British open water swimmers, advised me after my first English
Channel swim to use liquid dishwashing detergent to cut through the lanolin. It
required half a bottle. This works for Vaseline and BodyGlide as well, though
they can also be removed with shampoo or skin soap, which may be gentler on
the skin.
Aquaphor
Recently, a friend of mine completed a fifteen-hour swim across the San Pedro
Channel and said that he used a thick coat of Aquaphor ointment in the areas that
chafed. He said it worked very well and stayed on through the swim.
Aquaphor is a product that Dr. Laura King, a dermatologist and a member of
my support crew, has recommended for chapped lips and for too much sun and

--- Page 35 Text ---
saltwater exposure. The Aquaphor helps the skin retain moisture and helps it
heal.
Alternative Lubricants
Another solution for chafing came from my friend Greg Miller, who is a national
champion cyclist. He competed in the Race Across America (RAAM) when it
first began in 1982, racing from the Santa Monica Pier in Los Angeles to the
Empire State Building in New York City. He also trained with the professional
Belgian cycling team with the idea that he would go pro.
Greg said that they cycled for up to eight hours a day in all kinds of
conditions, including ice and snow, and during the long rides, they experienced
real problems with chafing. The Belgian team’s solution was to place large
beefsteaks inside their cycling shorts and between their butts and the bicycle
saddles. Greg said the bicycle seat tenderized the steaks instead of their
backsides. He said it was awfully messy, but it literally saved their butts.
While this tactic worked well for the cyclists, swimming with steaks in your
swimsuit could attract the big fish. But you can always learn something from top
competitors in other sports. Friends who still compete in Race Across America
have discovered the lubrication qualities of Desitin, an ointment used primarily
to prevent diaper rash. The RAAM cyclists use large amounts of the ointment on
their butts and other areas that chafe. Though they sweat a lot during their races,
they say the Desitin doesn’t wash off. An added benefit is that it contains zinc, a
compound that’s been used as a sun block for years. You may find it helpful on
long open water swims.
Which lubricant you use is a highly personal choice. Keep the following
things in mind when deciding:
~ During your training sessions, test the various lubricants and see what will work best for you. If
you don’t want to be bothered by applying the lubricant with rubber gloves, either use your ring
fingers to apply the lubricant, or make sure to wash your hands with soap and water. Otherwise, you
will be looking through smeared goggles.
~ When applying these lubricants, make sure you don’t get any on your face; if you do, it will get
on your goggles. Use waterproof sunscreen on your face, but make sure you apply it above your
eyebrows and around your goggle area; otherwise the sunscreen will drip into your eyes and will
sting and make it difficult to see and swim.
~ Apply globs of lubricant to your skin to make sure it will stay for the entire swim. It is difficult
to reapply during a swim, and the time it takes to do so will cause you to cool down. Be sure to apply
enough for your swim.
~ Some swimmers prefer to cover all of their exposed skin and their swimsuits with the lubricant.
Some swimmers apply the lubricant only to key points of friction along their bodies. Some male
swimmers apply lubricant to all the unexposed areas beneath their swimsuits.

--- Page 36 Text ---
~ The best way to remove the lubricant is with soap and water during a warm to hot shower.
~ Lanolin is more adhering, and if you want to get it off quickly, dishwashing soap works best.
~ Soaps will dry out the skin. Dr. King recommends using body lotions after long swims to put
moisture back into the skin. The swimsuit will also chafe less if your skin is moist.

--- Page 37 Text ---
TREATMENT FOR CHAFING
Whether your swimsuit chafes enough to make your skin red or so much that it
cuts into your skin, there’s a chance those spots can become infected. It’s
important to take care of the affected areas.
Dr. King advises doing the following:
~ Wash the area with soap and water to reduce the bacterial count.
~ Use Aquaphor, an over-the-counter cousin of Vaseline, that has been shown to have
antimicrobial properties and is just as effective as Neosporin or bacitracin at helping to heal minor
infections. Aquaphor has the benefit of very little to no risk of allergic contact dermatitis, whereas
bacitracin is the most common contact allergen in the United States, followed closely by Neosporin.

--- Page 38 Text ---
SUNSCREEN PRODUCTS
Most people are aware that prolonged exposure to UVA and UVB rays from the
sun damages the skin and may lead to skin cancer. Experts believe skin damage
can be averted by using sunscreen.
Swimmers should use a waterproof sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher. No
sunscreen is completely waterproof, so try a variety of sunscreens during
workouts. Apply the sunscreen an hour before a workout or event so it has time
to be absorbed into the skin. Reapply every hour if possible.
No sunscreen has been conclusively proven to stay on better than others, and
there probably is no difference for open water swims versus non–open water,
although salt water is abrasive and may cause sunscreen to come off faster than
fresh water. The effects of the UVA and UVB are more dramatic at high altitude,
and in the southern hemisphere, where the ozone layer is thinner. That makes it
all the more important to reapply sunscreen regularly.
This was something I learned on my training swims in Lake Titicaca. At an
altitude of 12,500 feet, and with the reflective element of the water, I got
burned.

--- Page 39 Text ---
SUNBURN PREVENTION
Another way to prevent sunburn is to wear protective clothing, which can also be
helpful in preventing seabather’s eruption and swimmer’s itch (see Chapter 13,
this page and this page). There are some shirts out there that don’t balloon up in
the water. But one of the problems with the sun-protective cloth is that it is
tightly woven and hence pretty warm. These fabrics may also cause chafing.

--- Page 40 Text ---
SUNBURN TREATMENT
Dr. King advises the following treatment for sunburns:
~ It is best to act quickly, within a few hours of sun exposure. Aspirin is a very good anti-
inflammatory and cuts down on sunburn reaction as well as being a painkiller.
~ Cortisone creams are soothing, too. The over-the-counter strength is pretty mild and won’t be
that effective, but the prescription-strength steroid (synonymous with “cortisone”) creams are helpful
when applied twice a day to burns. The more common generic names are fluocinonide 0.05% cream
and clobetasol 0.05% cream.
~ In severe cases, oral cortisone (prednisone or a Medrol Dosepak) can be used.
~ If you have a severe burn, get professional medical attention.

--- Page 41 Text ---
GOGGLES
Goggles are essential for open water swimming. They enable a swimmer to see
above and under the water. They reduce eye irritation from salt water and other
elements. Like sunglasses, they reduce the glare on the water and enable the
swimmer to see obstacles, such as boats and windsurfers. Some goggles with
UVA and UVB protection can protect swimmers’ eyes from the sun’s harmful
rays and reduce the chances of cataracts.
Speedo, TYR, Barracuda, Aqua Sphere, Jaguar, Wiley, FINIS, Cressi, Body
Glove, Blue Seventy, Aqua World, and even Marvel and Disney make
swimming goggles. They are available in a wide variety of styles, colors, sizes,
and shapes. Swimming goggles must fit. If they leak, they will become a
distraction and could affect the outcome of a long-distance swim.
Finding a pair of goggles is like selecting a pair of shoes. Some people like
goggles that are very tiny and rest inside the eye orbit; some prefer that the
goggle create a seal around the eyebrows and on the cheeks; others would rather
wear a swim mask.
The best way to choose goggles is to go to a swimming supply or sports store
and try them on. Hold the goggles up to your face until they create suction, but
do not put the straps over your head. If the goggles stay on your face for about
ten to twenty seconds, you have a good seal, and the goggles fit your face. No
matter how stylish the goggles are, don’t purchase them if they do not fit.
The straps are used to hold the goggles in place. If you are tightening your
straps so much that the cups leave a deep imprint around your eyes and you look
like a raccoon after a workout, you are pulling your straps too tight. If you are
getting headaches from the goggles, you are probably wearing the straps too
tight.
After you have adjusted the goggle straps so that they fit comfortably, move
on to the nosepiece, which some brands allow you to adjust. If the nosepiece
pinches, you have pulled it too tight. The nosepiece area should fit comfortably,
and water should not leak in from either side of the nose. If it does, then you
need to find a different pair of goggles. Some swim equipment manufacturers
make smaller goggles to fit a woman’s face, as well as goggles just for children.
The lens color is an important consideration. For open water swimming during
daylight hours, I like smoked or darker-tinted goggles. The darkness cuts the
glare. Many of my friends use red-, amber-, green-, or blue-tinted goggles.
Clear goggles do not reduce the glare. During a night swim, or in the early

--- Page 42 Text ---
morning before the sun has risen, I usually wear clear goggles. Smoked goggles
make everything very dark and reduce your ability to see at night.
One pair of goggles is usually all you need for a workout, but during a long
open water swim, it is important to have three or four pairs of goggles in case the
ones you’re wearing leak. Test all of your goggles during your workouts to make
sure they fit.
When trying a new set of goggles during a workout, I usually wear the pair
that I know fits, and I either carry the test pair around my wrist or in the small of
my back, under my suit, until I want to take them out and test them.
Even if you’re careful, it is easy to smear Vaseline, sunscreen, or lanolin on
your goggles, and it is not fun swimming with restricted vision. I made that
mistake on my first English Channel swim.
Usually, a swimmer will find a certain style of goggle that fits, like a favorite
pair of shoes, and will stay with that style, but sometimes it is fun to try out new
colors and shapes and see if they work for you.
The life of your goggles depends on how well you take care of them. Some
swimmers have a favorite pair that lasts three or four years. To extend the life of
your goggles, rinse them out in fresh water after you use them. If they came with
a case, use it; it will reduce the chance of their getting scratched or broken.
Goggles sometimes fog, making it difficult to see out of them. Licking the
goggles is something that swimmers have done for years to clear the lenses.

--- Page 43 Text ---
SWIM CAPS
There are basically three types of swimming caps made from different material:
Lycra, latex, and silicone. A swim cap has two important functions in open
swimming: to keep the swimmer warm by reducing heat loss through the head;
and to make the swimmer more visible when swimming. But don’t count on any
swim cap to keep your hair dry.
Lycra is a stretchy and breathable fabric, though it doesn’t provide much
insulation, and the fabric is not as bright in color as latex or silicone. I have tried
Lycra swim caps during open water swimming, and I believe that latex or
silicone swim caps are better choices. Latex caps fit the swimmer’s head very
well and grip on. They are a bit thinner than silicone swim caps, and they tend to
pull your hair if not removed carefully.
While I’ve used all three types of swim caps over the years, I think silicone
caps work the best. Some swimmers feel that they slide around their head
somewhat, but I would rather adjust my swimming cap than have my hair torn.
The silicone swim cap usually has a much longer life than the latex swim cap. It
is somewhat more expensive than the latex, but it lasts longer, doesn’t tear my
hair, and better reduces the heat loss through my head. Expect to replace your
swim cap once or twice a year.
I pick colors that the beach lifeguards along the California coast can see.
Bright orange, bright yellow, and bright red are my choices for daylight
swimming. Black, blue, green, and silver are not as visible in the ocean and are
not good choices. During a night or early-morning swim before the sun rises, I
usually wear a white or yellow swim cap.
Other Equipment: Fins and Paddles
Fins and paddles are good training tools in the swimming pool, but in the
open water, they can give you a false sense of confidence. My preference is
not to use them as a tool for open water swimming.

--- Page 44 Text ---
WET SUITS
Many open water swimmers are purists; they wear only swimsuits, no wet suits.
Their goal is to attempt and complete a swim under their own power. However,
there are growing numbers of open water swimmers and triathletes who want to
wear wet suits.
Bruce Jones, a longtime surfer who owns Bruce Jones Surfboards in Sunset
Beach, California, has been fitting surfers with O’Neill wet suits for years.
Surfing wet suits are generally thicker than wet suits meant for open water
swimmers and triathletes, but for any of these water sports, there are some basic
considerations when buying a suit.
Jones says that the three most important factors are fit, construction, and
thickness. When he helps a person find a wet suit, he first checks the size chart
supplied by the manufacturer and then has the individual try on the wet suit in
the store. The wet suit cannot be loose; it needs to be a little tight, as it will
soften up when you get into the water.
Wet suits trap a thin layer of water that warms up if you are moving and
creating heat. Jones says if you aren’t moving, you won’t stay warm, unless
you’re in tropical waters. If you are swimming in cold water, he advises
choosing a wet suit with glued and blind-stitched seams; otherwise the seams
will leak. If you are swimming in warm to hot water, you need to get a wet suit
that is flat-stitched. The flat-stitch has tiny needle holes along the seams and
allows some water to enter the wet suit, which cools it down. Most surfers use
wet suits that are two millimeters thick; most triathletes use wet suits that are
half a millimeter to one millimeter thick.
Leonard Kurp, who owns the Tri-Pacific shop in Long Beach, California, is a
triathlete who believes that the best manufacturers of wet suits for triathletes and
open water swimmers are Aqua Sphere, Blue Seventy, Orca, Profile Design,
TYR, and Zoot. “These triathlon wet suits are all about speed,” says Kurp. There
are many different types, and if you are going to use one in competition, check
with the United States Triathlon Association and the United States Master
Swimming or the organizing body to make sure the wet suit is legal for use
during your competition.
It matters how the wet suit is designed and how it fits. When you are trying to
figure out what kind of triathlon wet suit to purchase, Kurp advises looking for
one designed for flexibility, buoyancy, and speed. Advances in Yamamoto
neoprene—wetsuit material—allow for greater flexibility; also, it is a slicker

--- Page 45 Text ---
material that enables you to move quickly through the water with less resistance.
When looking at a triathlon wet suit, you should be able to see buoyancy
panels across the chest and around the arms, legs, and glutes. These panels are
sewn together to create the wet suit, and this construction enables you to move in
a less restricted way than if you were wearing a wet suit made for surfers. Make
sure there is a knee flex panel, which allows you to kick freely, as well as
silicone seals around the wrists to prevent the arms from filling up with water.
These wet suits also provide some warmth, and they are useful in cool or warm
waters, but it’s important to note that in tropical waters, you can overheat.
If you are swimming long distances in a triathlon wet suit, there is a good
chance that it will chafe. You may want to apply BodyGlide or Aquaphor to
reduce chafing, but don’t use Vaseline, as the petroleum jelly will break down
the neoprene.

--- Page 46 Text ---
SWIM SKINS
Swim skins are an alternate to triathlete wet suits. Mike Orton, a competitive
swimmer in college, a triathlete, and now a sales representative for Blue Seventy,
says that swim skins were designed for triathletes swimming in warm waters,
like off Kona, Hawaii. They are made of a slick, nearly paper-thin fabric, a blend
of polyester and spandex that enables a swimmer to slip through the water. Swim
skins were used at the Olympic Games in Beijing, and they created a lot of
controversy. Many of the swimmers who wore the swim skins broke world
records. Since then, swim skins have been illegal for USA Swimming and
Olympic swimming competitions, but they are still being used in triathlon
competitions.
There are many swimmers who are purists, who want to achieve their best
unaided—which I agree with—but swim skins offer additional advantages: They
can reduce the amount of UVA and UVB exposure, and they may provide a
barrier to jellyfish stings.
As with wet suits, always try on your swim skin to make sure you’ll feel
comfortable swimming in it.

--- Page 47 Text ---
Finding an Open Water Swimming Coach and Group
Do not begin open water swimming on your own. Find an open water swimming
coach and a group to swim with. Rick Knepper, the SEAL instructor and open
water swimmer, explains why there are strong reasons to find a coach/mentor
and a group of swimmers to train with.
Linking up with the right person or group will enable developing swimmers to
work collaboratively to sort out and manage their development as an open water
swimmer; the more experienced the coach or overall group is, the sooner they
can identify what is going well and what has the potential to cause disaster.
Every swimmer needs to realize that he or she is “an experiment of one,” and
the more experienced swimmers helping to find a good training plan, the better;
lessons learned are tough in the sport of long-distance ocean swimming.
Find people who are experienced open water swimmers and have completed
events, coached others, and participated in helping others by supporting
crew/paddler activities. They are good for lessons learned, advice, and help for
training and event day. Knowing and being associated with qualified people can
be useful when life’s schedules require you to ask several different people to
help with a swim as a swimming partner or a paddler.
Selecting a qualified open water swimming coach is critical. Laura, my sister,
has coached for over twenty-five years at Alamo Area Aquatic Association in
Texas. She was a starter on the United States National Water Polo team, swam in
Division One nationals, was the first female lifeguard at Huntington State Beach
in California, assistant-coached men’s swimming and water polo at Washington
and Lee University, and has spent years devising technical approaches to
swimming efficiency. She has listened to all the great coaches in the United
States, learned from them, and incorporated that into her own coaching. She
suggests asking these questions in order to evaluate a coach:

--- OCR from Page 47 Image 1 ---
Chapter 3
a

--- Page 48 Text ---
~ What is the coach’s background and knowledge base in regard to open water swimming?
~ Is this going to be someone you can absolutely trust? Ultimately, you may be trusting him or her
with your life.
You can use two general approaches to evaluate the knowledge base of a
potential coach. The first approach is to find someone who is a well-known open
water swimmer and/or successful and reputable open water coach. Because not
many people fit into this first category, you can evaluate a person’s credentials
and assess his or her experience with open water safety through established
competitive swimming organizations. In the United States, these are USA
Swimming, the American Swimming Coaches Association, the United States
Lifesaving Association, and the American Lifeguard Association. Essential
questions regarding credentials include:
~ Is this person a certified coach with the American Swimming Coaches Association? If so, what
level has he achieved? (Level 1 is the lowest level of experience.)
~ Is she a certified coach with USA Swimming? This certification requires CPR, first aid, and
coaches’ safety certifications, and also requires passing criminal background checks. These are the
minimal requirements for a professional swimming coach.
~ Is he or she certified through the United States Lifesaving Association or the American
Lifeguard Association?
When looking for an open water swimming coach, you want someone with
these basic certifications; plus, you want the coach to have open water
experience. This may include beach lifeguarding, open water competitions, or
training from a reputable and successful open water swimming coach.
Evaluating whether you can trust a potential coach is more difficult but
essential. In order to achieve your goals, you need to find a coach with whom
you can build a bond of mutual trust. When you are in the middle of a difficult
situation, you need to know that you can absolutely trust and rely on this person,
that he or she will help you find your inner strength and resolve but also will not
recklessly lead you into harm’s way by either stretching you beyond your
physical limits or leading you into hazardous waters. Building trust is an
iterative process that begins with effective communication. That is, the coach
will define the first step in a process, and the swimmer will execute that step.
Based on the outcome of the first step (success, failure, no change), the coach
will define the next step, the swimmer will execute it, and so on.
If you can’t communicate clearly and effectively with the potential coach, then
you are unlikely to develop a beneficial relationship. Watch him or her coach.
Do you like the person’s style? Do you like how she communicates and
motivates her athletes? Do the swimmers like him or fear him? Which style do

--- Page 49 Text ---
you need as an athlete? Do the workouts appear challenging and interesting and
fun, or are they boring and lacking mental engagement? Does the coach only tell
the athletes what to do? For example, does the coach just say, “Swim ten reps of
one hundred meters freestyle in two minutes”? Or does the coach interact with
the swimmers, providing technical feedback and further instructions for
correction? Remember, simply telling a swimmer what he’s doing wrong isn’t
useful. The coach must state what is wrong and how to correct it, then follow up,
informing the swimmer whether the correction was made.
Set up a meeting with the potential coach to determine if she or he is
genuinely interested in helping you achieve your goals. As part of this meeting,
you need to clearly state your goals; the coach should be able to provide a plan
that will include a training regimen and a general outline toward achieving the
goal. Both the coach and swimmer must understand that there is a process of
developing goals, training toward short-term goals, achieving short-term goals,
and refining training and revising intermediate milestones on the path to the
main goal. Through this process, the coach and swimmer build trust—the coach
in the swimmer’s desire, commitment, and determination to achieve the goal;
and the swimmer in the coach’s ability to lead, motivate, and provide the
opportunities that will build the mental and physical skills necessary to achieve
the goal. Building trust is intertwined with the iterative training program. The
bond of trust between swimmer and coach should strengthen during this process.
If it doesn’t, then this person may have been great at one stage in your
development but may not be whom you need to take you forward.

--- Page 50 Text ---
FINDING SPECIFIC COACHES AND GROUPS
One way to find open water swimming coaches and clubs is to try contacting
U.S. Masters Swimming or some of the clubs and teams that have a long
tradition of open water swimming.
U.S. Masters Swimming has a list of coaches and a list of open water
swimming seminars and open water swimming races. The organization is a very
good resource, and if you are a member, you can receive SWIMMER magazine,
which features all aspects of open water and masters swimming. Laura Hamel,
the editor, also suggested checking out their website for more information about
clubs, coaches, and news about open water swimming (see Sources for website
address; this page).
There are also clubs and swim teams around the world for open water
swimming. Two of the most established in the United States, each with a history
of nurturing all levels of open water swimmers, are the South End Rowing Club,
established in 1873, and the Dolphin Club, established in 1877, each among the
oldest athletic clubs west of the Mississippi. They are located in Aquatic Park,
near Fisherman’s Wharf in San Francisco. Though they share a common wall,
and both have a long tradition of open water swimming and rowing, they have
very different philosophies.
Dolphin Club members limit the range of their swims to the cove in front of
the clubhouse in Aquatic Park unless they are participating in a special event.
The South End Rowing Club has swims throughout the bay. For more advanced
open water swimmers, the South End Rowing club conducts daily open water
swims for club members, and they often invite competent swimmers to train
with them.
To participate in the South End swims or Dolphin Club swims, you need to be
a club member. Members from all over the country travel to San Francisco when
they can in order to swim with their club. Both clubs welcome swimmers of all
abilities. As Bill Wygant, the former president of the South End Rowing Club,
says,
We are accommodating and welcoming to swimmers of all types—yes,
even with wet suits—for club swims. We take care of everyone on club
swims and then feed them breakfast. But for our longer swim program,
that tolerance kind of disappears, and you need to be able to make the
swim or go home. We are a place that asks you to measure your own

--- Page 51 Text ---
capabilities and self-select out if you are not trained or ready for a
swim. On our longer swim program, when we say, “Get in the water,”
we don’t want a lot of discussion about it. Just go, and we expect you
to finish the swim. If not, we just stack you in the Zodiac and hope for
the best. This is much different than the Dolphin Club. We like it that
way.
Both clubs are great places to swim. They have an enormous wealth of
knowledge based on more than one hundred years of swimming in the bay, and
on accumulation of information from daily experiences of swimmers from both
clubs. They also consult and work with the U.S. Coast Guard in San Francisco.
The swims give their members the opportunity to swim in cool and cold water,
in areas where there are very strong tides, currents, and wind. Conditions are
similar to what swimmers experience on the English Channel and the Catalina
Channel crossings, making the bay a great place to train for serious channel
swims.
The South End Rowing Club conducts short swims from the Golden Gate or
Pier 39 to the clubhouse and nearby locations. They also organize medium-
length swims that include cross-current swims from Alcatraz, double Alcatrazes
over to Alcatraz and back—called Bump and Runs, or Round Trip Alcatrazes—
swims from Angel Island, Bridge to Bridge swims, or Sausalito to the club
swims. Their longer swims include Point Bonita to the club; Candlestick Park to
the club; and Bay Bridge to Ocean Beach, which they call “Bay 2 Breakers.”
Each is about ten miles long. Angel Island, round-trip, takes about two and a half
hours to complete.
The South End Rowing Club also hosts a famous race called the Alcatraz
Invitational—a 1.25-mile open water swim from a point abeam to Alcatraz
Island and back to the South End Rowing Clubhouse, at the foot of the Hyde
Street Pier in San Francisco. They often host six hundred swimmers. It is a fun
swim. Swimmers are shuttled out in groups on a ferryboat to Alcatraz Island.
The swimmers jump into the water one at a time and swim across an area near
where the bay flows into the Pacific. There’s nothing quite as beautiful as the
Golden Gate Bridge illuminated in the bright morning sunlight, spanning the bay
from Mount Mason to the Marin Headlands. You see the yachts in Yacht Harbor,
and in front of you the opening in the seawall—the entrance to the South End
and Dolphin Clubhouse—Ghirardelli Square, the elegant tall ships in the
National Park, and off to your left, all of Fisherman’s Wharf, Coit Tower, and the
deep blue bay waters that flow past the famous piers beyond Bay Bridge ten
miles in the distance. The energy level for the Alcatraz Invitational is always

--- Page 52 Text ---
extremely high. Often the club allows other groups to join, or supports a special
cause.
One year, Bill Wygant was asked by Jeff Pokonosky, a swimmer in the Encinitas
area, if Jake, his golden retriever, could swim in the Alcatraz race. Bill discussed
it with the club, and they thought it was a great idea; then Bill called me, and I
thought so, too, but I asked him many of the same questions I’d ask a human
swimmer: How much has Jake trained for Alcatraz? If he’s used to swimming
off San Diego, will he have time to acclimate to the cooler water temperatures in
the San Francisco Bay? He could go into hypothermia, just like a human
swimmer. Will they have a support boat for Jake and be able to pull him out if he
aspirates water? Will they have a vet on call? Has Jake swum in choppy water
and in water with strong currents? Will he be distracted, swimming with a large
group of people? Will he stay with Jeff? Is there a way to keep him away from
the other swimmers, since he might bump into other swimmers and
unintentionally scratch them? While most swimmers love dogs, not all
swimmers do, and having a dog on board may stress them out. Can Jeff keep
Jake on a leash before the swim, and set off with the lead group, and swim to a
designated rowboat?
Bill discussed these questions with Jeff, who said that the dog had had a health
check and was in great shape. Jake was swimming up to two miles a day in the
waters off Encinitas and running on the beach and retrieving tennis balls. He was
used to going in and out of the surf, and he sometimes swam in the afternoon in
choppy water. He would get to San Francisco a few days early to acclimate to
the cooler water temperature.
On the day of the Alcatraz race, swimmers set off in manageable groups, with
the fastest swimmers in the first group, the second-fastest swimmers in the next
group, and slower groups after that. Jake set off with Jeff amid the fastest
swimmers, and they swam about one hundred yards off to the left of the other
swimmers. Jake saw the pack of swimmers take off, and he wanted to race with
the pace and beat the lead swimmer. Jeff knew that the pace was too fast for Jake
and persuaded him to slow down. But when Jake saw the other swimmers
passing him, he started picking up his pace again. Jeff had to keep holding him
back so he would be able to complete the swim.
Jake’s coat kept him warm, but Jeff was cold at the end of their swim. They
were greeted by cheering crowds, and once they caught their breath, they stayed
on the beach to cheer on the incoming swimmers. The swimmers cheered one
another on, and family and friends wrapped them up in warm towels, jackets,
and blankets as they emerged from the water and handed them hot drinks. It was

--- Page 53 Text ---
a great day. That is what is so special about open water swimming: Everyone
supports one another.
Other West Coast Swim Coaches and Groups
La Jolla Cove, near San Diego, is another great place to train. Swimmers of all
ages and abilities swim in the La Jolla Cove. Bob West has swum there for years.
He is a kingpin there—he knows every swimmer and every visiting swimmer
and is always prepared to introduce and pair up swimmers based on their speed
and compatibility. Once a high school football coach, and for years an open
water swimmer, Bob encourages swimmers, educates them, and makes sure they
have a chance to learn from other swimmers, including some who have swum
the English Channel and San Pedro Channel.
East Coast Swim Coaches and Groups
The Coney Island Brighton Beach Open Water Swimmers (CIBBOWS) are well
known for their open water swims off Brighton Beach and elsewhere in the New
York City area. They are an established group with a core of very competent
members who welcome new swimmers. It is great to have other people to swim
with, to pace with, and to share the swimming experience with. They are
knowledgeable about open water training, and some members of the group have
swum across the English Channel and San Pedro Channel (see Sources for
website address; this page).
A great open water training group in East Hampton, New York, is YMCA
Open Water Swim Training (YOWST), through the YMCA East Hampton
RECenter and coached by Tim Treadwell. Tim is a beach lifeguard, marine
safety officer, open water swimmer, and coach of a masters program that travels
to Bermuda for a winter open water swim. See Sources (this page) for his
contact information.
There are three open water swims in East Hampton sponsored by East
Hampton Volunteer Ocean Rescue (see Sources for the website with event
details; this page).
The Sea Monkeys in Seal Beach, California, train along the shore of Seal
Beach for most of the year and have a history of lifeguard participation in the
workouts.
Santa Barbara Swimming Association conducts open water swims and
channel swims and have experience supporting some technical and challenging
swims (see Sources for website address; this page).

--- Page 54 Text ---
Other U.S. Swim Coaches and Groups
Waikiki Swim Club is Hawaii’s oldest club devoted to open water swimming
(see Sources for website address; this page).
Vision Quest Coaching in the Lake Michigan area works with experienced
channel swimmers (see Sources for website address; this page).
Masters long-distance world record holder and former University of Texas
swimming coach Dr. Keith Bell, along with Sandy Neilson-Bell, my college
swim team buddy and Olympic triple gold medalist, have created numerous open
water swimming events in the Austin, Texas, area, including an open water stage
race: the Tex Robertson Highland Lakes Challenge (see Sources for website
address; this page). This race takes place over a five-day period in five of the
upper highland lakes in Texas hill country. They also host the October Lake
Travis Relay (see Sources for website address; this page), an approximately
twelve-mile relay just outside Austin. It provides a challenge for six-man relay
team members, as well as a limited number of solo swimmers. You can join the
American Swimming Association’s mailing list for an updated calendar of these
and other open water races at their website (see Sources for website address; this
page).
International Swim Coaches and Groups
There are also overseas open water swimming groups and associations. They
have members who are experienced open water swimmers.
Australia Surf Lifesaving Association: www.sls.com.au
England: www.brightonsc.co.uk
British Long Distance Swimming Association: www.bldsa.org.uk
Jersey Long Distance Swimming Club: www.jerseyseaswims.org
Serpentine Swimming Club: serpentineswimmingclub.com
The ASS Southeastern Region: www.southeastswimming.org
South Africa has an active open water swimming community, especially in Cape Town:
www.capeswim.com
Another way to find an open water swimming coach is to attend some open
water swimming competitions. You will meet other open water swimmers, see
their coaches, and be able to observe how the coaches interact with their
swimmers. If you are coming to the competition from out of your area, you can
ask coaches at the event if they know coaches in your area. There is a strong
network within the swimming community, and most coaches will try to help you.

--- Page 55 Text ---
Triathlon Coaches and Groups
John Martin, with communications and media relations for USA Triathlon,
recommended taking a look at USA Triathlon’s club listing page on their website
to locate a nearby club. They also have a searchable database of coaches that can
help you find a triathlon coach. See Sources (this page) for the website
addresses.
USA Triathlon is a great place to find out where triathlons will occur
throughout the year and network with other triathletes and open water
swimmers.
Lani Ralston is a friend who competes in triathlons, Ironman, ultramarathon
runs, and open water swims. She trains and swims on the East Coast and said
that the open water swimming areas are well-kept secrets. She explained that if
you just jump in the ocean or a lake where a lifeguard is not on duty, you will get
a rather hefty fine, and the coast guard levies some penalties, too. Local triathlon
clubs usually have information on which boat launch areas are okay with open
water swimming, offer group swim times, and can guide athletes to open water
swim coaches. Usually, you have to be a member to access forums and get this
information. Sometimes a race’s website will have this kind of information on a
training page.
Lani said that a number of organizations put on triathlons. Ironman is a brand
name owned by the World Triathlon Corporation (WTC). There are lots of races
with a similar 2.4-mile (3.8-kilometer) swim, 112-mile (180.2-kilometer) bike
ride, and 26.2-mile (45.1-kilometer) run. They typically are called Iron Distance
races to avoid legal problems and are often run by other companies, such as
Revolution3 (Rev3), or local clubs. USA Triathon is the governing body of the
sport, just like USA Swimming or Track and Field. You have to buy a license
from them to participate in a tri.
Rev3 is different from the Ironman-branded races. Rev3 (see Sources for
website address; this page) is oriented toward customer service and families.
They usually start and finish their races at amusement parks, where families get
in for free and can enjoy themselves while the athletes are out racing. This series
started in Connecticut, and in the past I have met both the female and male
Ironman world champions there, as well as raced with them. All of these
organizations are resources for finding a qualified open water swimming coach
and finding friends to train with.

--- Page 56 Text ---
Technical Skills for Open Water Swimming
Swimming through the open water can be very Zenlike. For many athletes, it is a
time when they meditate. The world is reduced to their swimming and the sea.
They hear the rhythm of their strokes, the crack and splash of the water as their
hands enter the sea. They hear the sounds of their inhale and exhale and the
bubbles bouncing out of their mouths. They watch the bubbles stream off their
fingertips. They hear the sounds of their feet popping out of the water and the
rhythm of the splashes. They hear the sounds of the waves crashing on shore, the
burst of energy released into the ocean when a bird breaks the water and captures
a fish. They hear the sound of the wind as it moves across the water, and the trill
of the windblown waves.

--- OCR from Page 56 Image 1 ---
Chapter 4
a

--- Page 57 Text ---
SWIMMING SKILLS REQUIRED
Swimming in open water feels different from swimming in a swimming pool.
The salt water makes you float higher, and the fresh water feels good against
your skin. Whether you are swimming in salt or fresh or pool water, you don’t
swim on the water, you swim through the water.
One of biggest mistakes swimmers make is trying to swim on top of the water
and fighting the water to stay up. They tend to shorten their swimming stroke,
lift their heads, and drop their hips so that they are more vertical. This makes
swimming difficult and causes some people to feel like they are sinking, which
isn’t true. Everyone floats, and everyone floats at a different level in the water
according to body type, percent body fat and how well it is distributed, lung
volume—how much air is brought into the lungs and residual volume—and how
much air remains in the lungs after exhalation.
Your lungs are like two balloons in your back, and when you are relaxed, they
fill with air and make you more buoyant. When you aren’t relaxed in the water,
the breaths that you take are usually shorter, and the lungs do not fill as much.
The more relaxed you are in the water, the easier it is to breathe, the more your
lungs fill with air, and the more you will float.

--- Page 58 Text ---
BREATHING DRILLS
A lot of swimmers don’t exhale in a relaxed way and don’t get all the air out on
an exhale to make room for the new air coming in, so their breathing is tight and
they are often breathless. They just can’t seem to get enough air. This throws off
their stroke, and they can’t relax in the water. Bobbing helps you regulate your
breathing. Bobbing drills are done in the shallow end of the swimming pool or in
a placid, stingray-free bay or other area of calm water. They are fun, and they
help you feel the lift—buoyancy—when you are in the water.
~ Go into water that is waist-to shoulder-deep.
~ Stand up, take a breath, and drop down under the water till your knees are bent.
~ Push off the bottom and exhale slowly.
~ Watch the bubbles roll out of your nose and mouth.
~ Do ten to fifteen bobs really slowly and let yourself relax.
~ When this drill begins to feel automatic, do ten more bobs. Have fun. Play with them. Blast off
the bottom and drop under the water. Exhale slowly.
~ If you are getting water up your nose, it is because you aren’t exhaling through your nose.
Practice ten bobs with your mouth closed and blow out through your nose during each bob.
~ When this feels automatic, do ten to fifteen bobs slowly and breathe out through your mouth and
nose.
Swimmers in the open water who breathe on only one side are blind on one
side and compensate by lifting their heads to see what’s going on around them.
Every time they lift their heads, their hips drop in the water, which immediately
increases resistance and inhibits speed, so they have to increase their energy
output to compensate for the increased resistance. In order to swim efficiently,
you need to bilateral-breathe. It is important that swimmers lift their heads to
navigate, establish their position in the water, and check for boaters and surfers,
but that can become a bad habit and a way of compensating for not breathing on
both sides.
Bilateral breathing enables you to adjust to the environment. If you are
swimming in windy conditions and you are breathing only on one side, there is a
good chance you will breathe in water. Not a good thing. Choking on water is
uncomfortable, distracting, and ultimately may affect the outcome of a swim by
making you sick. If you are able to breathe on both sides of your body, you open
up more options.
Years ago, on my swim across Cook Strait between the North and South
islands of New Zealand, the wind was blowing constantly at forty-five knots.

--- Page 59 Text ---
The visibility on my windward side was reduced to zero. Waves were slamming
into my face and I couldn’t get a breath; I just kept breathing water. Suddenly, it
occurred to me that I could breathe only on the right side and not drink water.
My stroke was no longer balanced, but at least I could keep swimming, and
when the wind shifted, I was able to go back to breathing on both sides of my
body.
Some swimmers, especially those who have been swimming for many years,
think that it is difficult to breathe on both sides of their bodies and resist doing
so, but this drill makes learning how to bilateral-breathe easy. When they start
breathing on both sides, they immediately feel how much better it is to swim this
way.
Bilateral Breathing Drill
Method:
~ Lie on your right side, as if you are going to swim sidestroke, with your right arm extended
above your head and the other arm resting on your side.
~ Put your face in the water and blow bubbles. Take a breath when needed.
~ Kick six to eight times on your side.
~ Take a stroke with your left arm and use the core of your body to roll all the way over to the
other side of your body. Make sure you are using your core to roll over. You will get a lot of power
and strength from your core.
~ With your left arm extended, let your right arm rest on your side as you kick on your side six to
eight times with your face in the water.
~ You want to maintain a straight line in the water. Usually, swimmers are more balanced on one
side than the other. Sometimes it takes a little more concentration and work on balance to kick on one
side as opposed to the other. But this exercise will help you balance your stroke and also swim in a
straighter line. It is easy to see which swimmers in the open water have a balanced stroke. Those who
are not balanced will swim in the direction of their dominant side, off to the right or the left, and not
maintain a straight line.
~ This drill will also help you maintain a horizontal position and enable you to move efficiently
through the water. You will be rotating from one side of your body to the other and reinforcing that
your arm stroke is done in conjunction with the rotation of your body, so that you are pulling with
your core as well as your arms. If you do not use your core with your arm strokes, you will not swim
efficiently. You will be swimming flat on the water, and if you are using only your arms, the muscles
in your arms will fatigue more rapidly and you will tire sooner.
~ This drill will also help you develop a stronger core and arms and legs, which will help you
increase your power, speed, and endurance when you are swimming.
Breathing and Breath-Holding Drill
In the swimming pool, when you turn your head to breathe, you can count on
getting a full breath of air; in the open water, if the water is choppy, there are no

--- Page 60 Text ---
guarantees. It’s no fun breathing water. Not only is it uncomfortable when your
mouth is full of water, but it causes you to abruptly stop swimming, and that
throws you completely off your pace.
One of the drills you can do to prepare for choppy water is to practice turning
your head to breathe without taking a breath.
~ Swim freestyle two hundred strokes and breathe every three strokes to warm up.
~ Swim freestyle one hundred more strokes at your pace, and breathe every third stroke. Every
once in a while, turn your head to breathe on the third stroke without actually taking a breath. Take a
breath on your fourth stroke.
~ Make sure that you are doing this drill with a buddy, so he or she can check on you to make sure
you’re okay and check for boat traffic. If you suddenly find you really need to breathe on the third
stroke, take a breath. The point of this drill is to learn how to avoid breathing in water.
~ Swim one hundred more strokes and repeat this drill.
~ Once you feel comfortable changing your breathing pattern, swim in mildly choppy water. As
you gain more experience and confidence, you will be able to feel the waves around your head and
judge the times when you can take a breath and when you’ll have to wait and turn to the opposite
side to breathe.
~ For intermediate and advanced swimmers: There are times when the wind and waves are so large
that it’s impossible to breathe on one side of your body. Breathe on the side you can get air, and have
someone in a kayak or boat, or on a paddleboard beside you, guide you and be there for safety.

--- Page 61 Text ---
HEAD POSITION IN THE WATER
One of the most important considerations in open water swimming is your head
position. Remember Newton’s third law of motion: For every action, there is an
equal and opposite reaction. Everything moves relative to everything else. If you
lift your head while you’re swimming, your hips will drop in the water. You will
immediately feel the increased resistance of the water against your body. Your
legs and hips will be like an anchor dragging through the water. Swimming in
this way requires a lot more energy, and you will tire faster than if you keep your
hips on the water’s surface.
Often I think of it like this: Your head leads the way, and your body follows.
There are two situations when people lift their heads. The first is when they
breathe, and the second is when they navigate. The way to swim more efficiently
is to make sure you are rotating your head when you breathe; don’t lift your
head. If you do the bilateral breathing drill, you will feel the roll of your body
and sense the right time to breathe. It will be easy to turn your head to breathe. If
you are swimming flat on the water and you aren’t rotating to breathe, you will
tend to lift your head. This is a bad habit. Depending on the distance that you are
swimming, lifting your head may decrease your speed by minutes or even hours,
because your reduced speed may cause you to miss a tide.
It is good to lift your head to navigate and to check for boats or vessels around
you. Toward the end of a swim, I have developed a bad habit of lifting my head
to see how much farther I have to swim to shore. The way I’ve tried to break that
habit is by counting up to a thousand strokes, then giving myself permission to
lift my head and see if I’ve made progress.
Some swimmers tend to bury their heads in the water. If you bury your head,
your hips will float higher on the water, but you will also create more water
resistance against your head, which will slow you down.
The solution for the most efficient head position is to let your head float and
find its ideal position in the water. Relax your neck muscles. Imagine the water
is a pillow supporting your head.
Another way to find your head position is by doing a drill in which you
exaggerate your head’s movement. Swim two hundred strokes with your head
out of the water, then swim two hundred strokes with your head buried in the
water. Repeat this drill five times so you swim a total of one thousand strokes.
You will feel how much more energy it takes to swim with your head out of the
water, like a water polo player, and you will feel how much extra energy you use

--- Page 62 Text ---
to press your face into the water. Now place your head in the water halfway
between the lifted and the buried head position and let your head float. You will
immediately feel yourself moving through the water, and you will feel how
much easier it is to swim. You will increase your efficiency, speed, and
endurance.
FEELING THE WATER TO SWIM FASTER
Years ago, Don Gambril told our swim team to go to a pet store and watch the
fish swim. He told us to notice how the fish used tiny sculling motions with their
fins and explained that the best swimmers in the world use these sculling
motions when they swim.
We watched goldfish swim across the fish tank. Using tiny sculling motions,
they flew across the tank. Don Gambril asked us to imagine that we were
swimming like the goldfish. Swimmers often imagine things because they spend
so much time in their heads while they’re swimming, but this time it would
improve our stroke mechanics.
George Block and Laura Cox, at Alamo Area Aquatic Association in Texas,
developed a series of sculling drills that will help you feel the water and “find
new water.” Finding new water is one of the most important concepts of
swimming. The more efficiently swimmers can find new water, the faster they
will propel themselves through the water.
Sculling
Whether you are a beginning, intermediate, or advanced swimmer, these sculling
drills are essential to swimming. They are the basis of your stroke. A musician
practices scales to find the right fingering on an instrument, to create the perfect
sound and tempo. Similarly, you need to practice these skills to refine your
swimming technique and find your perfect pitch through the water.
Sculling drills will help you find new water and will help you find the correct
placement of your hands in the water. They will help you improve all of your
strokes, though the focus of the drills described below is on freestyle, since the
majority of open water swimmers use freestyle during their swims.
If you do each drill in sequence, as described below, your arms will naturally
go to the right positions when you are pulling, and you will find the ultimate arm
stroke unique to your own body. The drills will also make sure you “pop” your
elbow up during the pull phase of your arm stroke during freestyle. This will

--- Page 63 Text ---
enable you to maintain a high elbow on your underwater pull, keep pressure on
the water, and pull more water so that you can swim more efficiently and faster.
Superman Scull and Drill
This drill helps you get a handle on the water, and it works on the catch part of
your stroke.
~ Float facedown on the water and extend your hands out in front of your head as if you are
Superman flying through the water. Scull with your arms extended straight out above your head.
~ Keep your hands relaxed and fingers together but also relaxed. Press slightly down on the water
and pitch (or angle) your palms forward to move the water toward your feet by moving your hands
side to side. Do not slice the water; do not push the water with your palms facing each other; and do
not move your hands straight back (or pull) toward your feet. Feel the water move. The way you
scull may be slightly different than your swimming buddy’s because your body type, flexibility, and
strength may be different. Some swimmers say they create a J shape and an inverted J shape with
their fingertips, and some swimmers say they create a small U shape with their fingertips when they
are sculling. You may make other motions, depending on your body type and strength level. The
most important thing is to maintain constant pressure on the water with your hands. You will also feel
the pressure of the water against your forearms.
~ For a beginning swimmer, scull two hundred times easy. Concentrate on feeling the way you are
moving your hands. Feel the water against your fingers and palms. Notice how quickly your tiny
hand movements propel you through the water.
~ Make sure your neck and shoulders are relaxed. If you tighten your body during this drill, you
will be wasting energy. Focus on your energy on your sculling.
~ Make sure you roll your head to breathe. Breathe on both sides, and notice where you are in the
water. If you are doing this drill with your swimming buddy nearby, close your eyes and feel your
hands moving the water. (By closing your eyes, you eliminate all distractions.) You’ll find that this
drill is relaxing and fun.
~ If you are an intermediate open water swimmer, continue this drill by sculling two hundred times
at a moderate speed. Make sure you are holding on to the water, even when you are increasing your
speed.
~ Repeat the drill by sculling one hundred times again at a slow pace, then swim four hundred
strokes freestyle at a slow pace. Feel the sculling motion when you catch the water at the start of your
arm stroke. Swim freestyle four hundred more strokes at a moderate pace. Make sure you catch the
water and keep constant pressure on it. You will feel the catch part of your pull (when your hand first
enters the water) immediately become stronger.
~ Swim relaxed freestyle for two hundred more strokes and move on to the Superman drill.
~ If you are an intermediate or advanced open water swimmer, continue to alternate between two
hundred sculls slow and two hundred sculls moderate for a mile, depending on the distance you’re
swimming that day. If you are swimming cold or in cold water, you will notice that your heat
production will be a lot lower than when you are swimming freestyle. If the water is cool or cold,
after eight hundred sculls, swim eight hundred strokes freestyle to increase your heat production. If
you are warm, continue the sculling drills for the mile, but if you have cooled down, do not continue
sculling; swim freestyle. Make sure you and your swimming buddy are monitoring each other. Keep
your eyes open when your buddy has his/her eyes shut.
~ Swim freestyle for a mile, concentrating on the catch of your stroke. You will feel how important
it is to begin the sculling motion as soon as your hand enters the water. By doing the next drill, you

--- Page 64 Text ---
will feel how your stroke progresses.
Windshield Wiper Scull and Drill
~ If you are working out in the open water, imagine that you are lying on your stomach on the side
of the pool with your head and arms extended over the edge and your hands in the water. Imagine
that you are keeping your elbows just above the waterline. Move your hands in and out with your
palms pitched backward like windshield wipers.
~ Float in the water on your stomach, with your face in the water, in the windshield wiper position.
Open your armpits and move your hands in and out with your palms pitched backward and fingertips
pointed toward the bottom. Some think of their arms moving like pendulums. Make sure you are
moving your arms side to side, not back and forth.
~ If you are a beginning swimmer, do the windshield wiper drill for two hundred strokes. Make
sure your fingers touch under the centerline of your body, and then sweep them out until your arms
are extended. Notice how your hands are positioned under your chest. Feel the water pressure on
your hands and forearms. Make sure to keep constant pressure on the water. If you slip water, you
lose the power phase of your stroke.
~ Use the Superman drill for two hundred sculls at a slow rate, then two hundred sculls at a
moderate rate. Remember when you speed up your hand movement that you need to keep holding on
to the water. Relax your body and let your hands and arms work. Breathe when you need to breathe.
Repeat this drill two more times.
~ To feel the sculling motion within your stoke, swim three hundred strokes freestyle, feeling the
middle part of your arm stroke and the windshield wiper part of your stroke. You will notice an
enormous difference. You will be able to feel how your hands are holding water and pressing it
backward. You will feel much more power in your stroke.
~ If you are an intermediate or advanced swimmer, continue the Superman drill for a mile.
Continue sculling, and increase your rate to four hundred sculls. Alternate between four hundred
slow and four hundred moderate for a mile, then swim half a mile or up to a mile freestyle. Feel the
windshield wiper’s sculling motion within your arm’s stroke. By focusing on this sculling motion,
you will hold on to more water through the range of your stroke and swim faster.
~ Continue your workout. Swim one mile freestyle. Think about the catch part of your stroke—the
Superman scull and the under-your-body part of the stroke—in the windshield wiper scull and feel
how you are integrating your stroke.
If you are sculling correctly, you will notice that your stroke rate—the number
of strokes you take per minute—is slower. That’s a good thing. It means that you
are getting a hold on the water and pulling new water. You may also feel the
added resistance of each arm stroke, which will make you stronger. As you work
on this drill, you will gain a better feel for the water, and as you become
stronger, you will be able to pull with more power and propel yourself faster.
Double-Dog Scull and Drill
This drill helps you work on the elbow pop of your stroke, which is essential in
swimming freestyle. It helps you maintain a high elbow during your underwater
pull. This is critical for maintaining pressure on the water. If you drop your

--- Page 65 Text ---
elbow during the underwater pull, you’ll slip water and lose the main power
portion of your stroke.
~ Start with the outsweep of the Superman scull and then insweep with a windshield wiper scull
and complete the double dog with an outsweep in the finish scull position with your hands snapping
past your hips. Make sure your fingertips are pointed toward the ocean or lake bottom during the
windshield wiper insweep and that your armpits stay open with your hands below your belly button.
~ For the beginning swimmer, scull one hundred times slowly and lift your head to breathe when
you need to; then scull one hundred times at a moderate rate. Focus on your hand and chest
movements. Feel the lift of the water as you bring your hands toward each other during the sculling
phase, and feel your chest drop into the water as you move your hands out toward your sides. Repeat
this drill four times, then swim freestyle for four hundred strokes and feel the double-dog phase of
the scull in your freestyle.
~ If you are an intermediate or advanced swimmer, continue the drill for a mile. Alternate between
sculling slowly and sculling at a moderate speed. Even though this drill is repetitious, it is important
to stay focused. Do not daydream. Pay attention to how your hands are moving. Feel the strength of
your hands and the powerful water movement you create when you are sculling.
~ Integrate this drill by swimming one mile freestyle, and concentrate on the downward-dog scull
within your freestyle stroke.
Finish Scull and Drill
The finish scull helps you work on the finish part of your arm stroke.
~ Lie on your stomach with your face in the water. Place your hands under your hips with your
arms held in by your sides and your fingertips pointed down toward the bottom of the lake or ocean.
~ Move your hands in a sculling motion in front of your hips. Concentrate on feeling the water.
This is a part of the stroke where some swimmers slip water and lose a lot of power. Focus on strong
movements. Breathe when you need to, by either lifting your head or rolling to the side.
~ If you are a beginning swimmer, do three hundred finish sculls at a slow speed to warm up. Do
three hundred sculls at a moderate speed, then three hundred sculls at a slow speed. Take your time
and feel your hands move the water. Do three hundred sculls at a moderate speed. Maintain your hold
on the water.
~ Swim six hundred strokes freestyle and feel the sculling motion that you use during the finish
part of your stroke.
~ If you are an intermediate or advanced swimmer, continue this drill for a mile. Increase your
sculling rate to four hundred sculls at a slow pace. Alternate between that and four hundred sculls at a
moderate pace.
~ Swim one mile freestyle and concentrate on the finish part within your arm stoke.
Integration of Sculling Drills
When you are swimming freestyle and you integrate these sculling drills, your
hands will move from one sculling position to the next, automatically creating
the perfect S curve under your body that coaches and swimmers talk about. You
will discover your stroke—a stroke that is unique to you and perfect for your

--- Page 66 Text ---
body.
As you become more in tune with your body and more comfortable in the
water in your own stroke, you will want to change around the sculling drills to
create variety in your workout. You may vary the distance and the speed that you
scull. As your sculling becomes second nature, increase your speed and scull
fast. Mix it up. Do the drills in different orders and combinations. Do all the
scull drills first and then swim. The more variety you can create within your
workout, the more interesting it will be, and the more likely you are to enjoy
your swim and have fun.
Increasing Your Feel of the Water and Drill
Sometimes when you remove stimulation and focus on one sense—for example,
closing your eyes and listening to your environment—you are able to heighten
your awareness of what’s occurring around you. It’s the same with swimming.
By reducing the size of your hand, this drill will give you more of a feel for the
water and, in turn, a stronger pull.
~ When you are swimming, ball up your fingers into fists and swim with your hands fisted for one
hundred meters. You will immediately notice that you have reduced the size of your “paddle” and
that you are not holding on to water. You will also feel the resistance of the water more against your
forearm.
~ Now swim one hundred meters with your hand open like a paddle, the way you normally swim.
You’ll feel the path that your hand makes through the water. The resistance should be constant. You
will be able to feel when you are holding on to the water and getting successful pulls and when you
are slipping water and not getting successful pulls.
~ Alternate one-hundred-meter swims with your hand shaped like a ball, and then relaxed like a
paddle, during the warm-up portion of your workout. This drill is like a tuning fork for your
swimming stroke; it helps you to focus on the biomechanics of your swimming stroke and your
efficiency. While most open water swimmers use freestyle as their main swimming stroke, you can
also use this drill for butterfly, backstroke, and breaststroke.
It is important to use different strokes during your workouts, especially if you
are swimming long distances. This serves several purposes: It will give you a
variety of swimming skills to work out; it will keep your mind active; and it will
enable you to work and stretch different muscle groups so that you can build
overall body strength.
If you swim primarily freestyle, and you roll over on your back and swim
backstroke, you will stretch out the muscles you use for swimming freestyle and
at the same time strengthen the muscles you use for backstroke.
When you swim breaststroke and butterfly, you focus on the catch part of your

--- Page 67 Text ---
stroke (the front part of the stroke when your hands enter and start pulling the
water). By working on this part of the stroke while doing breaststroke and
butterfly, you will gain a better catch when you are swimming freestyle. This, in
turn, will help you swim faster but also enjoy being in the open water more.
When you swim backstroke, it is more difficult to sight buoys and piers to swim
on course, so you have to be even more alert to your surroundings. Use a
reference point beyond your feet and line up with that point in order to stay on
course. Also, swim inside a buoy line and with another competent swimmer, or
have a kayaker or paddler beside you. Glance toward shore to make sure you’re
swimming in a straight line; if the lifeguard stations or the people or buildings on
land look closer and then farther away, you are weaving in and out and need to
pull more evenly with your arms. Feel the water movement and figure out if you
are in a current that is moving you off course, then compensate by turning into or
out of the current.
Swimming backstroke will help you hone your open water skills, but just as
important, you will gain a different perspective and see the beauty around you.
You can see the depths and color changes in the sky; you can watch the clouds
sail across the sky and how they merge and slip apart and change in shape and
texture and color. You can watch seabirds—gulls, terns, pelicans, ducks, grebes,
cormorants, phoebes, geese, great blue herons, sandpipers, willets, sanderlings,
swans, and many other water birds—circling, diving, flapping, and gliding. You
can watch the movement of the sun, the way it illuminates the water, and the
way its rays are altered by the clouds. You can see sailboats, kite surfers, and
windsurfers in the distance, and tell the direction of the wind, and know where
the current will grow stronger or where it will diminish. You can watch airplanes
and helicopters move across the constantly changing sky, and enjoy seeing the
movement of life around you.
When you swim butterfly, you focus on the dolphin motion of your body. You
work on developing the power of your core and your dolphin kick. You work on
the strength of your arms and the rhythm of the stroke and breath. This helps you
with your overall body conditioning. Your breathing pattern allows you to lift up
for a breath and see what is directly in front of you, and when you drop
underwater during the recovery, you can see what is below you. You are focused
on the worlds in front of and below you, and you’re able to observe life beneath
you, the kelp beds or coral reefs teeming with fish and crustaceans.
When you swim breaststroke, you can glide along the surface of the water, and

--- Page 68 Text ---
as with butterfly, you transit two worlds, the place you are reaching toward and
the world you are moving over. When you swim breaststroke, you can drive your
arms forward and propel your stroke with a strong frog kick, but you can also
use breaststroke as active recovery, in which you slow down, catch your breath,
and take time to enjoy the feel of the water and the way your body moves
through it.
Maintaining a Straight Line and Drill
One of the ways to swim in a straight line is to make sure you open your eyes
when your face is in the water. If you are closing your eyes, you will be blind for
a few moments, which will affect your balance, and you will veer off course.
A drill to help you maintain a straight line is to swim with your eyes closed.
This drill must be done with a buddy swimming right beside you at all times in a
safe swimming area. Your swimming buddy will be there to watch out for you,
and you will do the same for your buddy.
~ Close your eyes and swim parallel to shore for one hundred strokes.
~ Open your eyes, turn around, and check your route. Did you swim straight or veer to the right or
the left?
~ If you did not swim in a straight line, you may be pulling and crossing over the midline under
your body with one of your arms. The way to feel the midline of your body is to take your index
finger, place it on your forehead, and run it down your face and body to create an imaginary line that
cuts your body in half. If you veer to the left when you’re swimming, you may be crossing the
midline of your body with your right hand. If you veer to the right, you may be crossing under the
midline of your body with your left hand.
~ You may be going off course because you’re pulling stronger with one arm than the other.
~ Try the drill again. If you were crossing your midline with one hand, take a wider stroke so that
you don’t cross the midline. If you were pulling stronger with one arm than the other, concentrate on
pulling the water with equal force.
All of these drills will help you balance in the water, keep you on a straighter
course, and help you swim faster in the open water.

--- Page 69 Text ---
Research

--- OCR from Page 69 Image 1 ---
Chapter 5
a

--- Page 70 Text ---
SELECTING A TRAINING AREA
While this section is mainly for beginning open water swimmers, every open
water swimmer should take these steps before entering any waterway.
When you start open water swimming, you want to find a waterway that is
relatively safe, where the water is clean, and where you can swim along the
shoreline. Before you even enter the water, talk to the local experts who know
the conditions. Go to lifeguard headquarters and talk with the older, experienced
lifeguards who have spent years patrolling the beach and the waters. Those
lifeguards will know great details about their beaches, and they will probably
have many interesting stories that will tell you what to be aware of when you
shuffle into the water.
To get a complete idea of what the water is like, also talk with the local
harbormaster, the coast guard, surfers, sailors, divers, fishermen, harbor patrol,
and other experienced open water swimmers. If you begin in a lake, river, or
stream that is within the bounds of a state or national park, such as Yellowstone
Lake, the park rangers can provide a wealth of information about the water
conditions, as well as how to respect and be aware of the bears and buffalo that
live around the lake.
SCOUTING/WALKING THE WORKOUT COURSE
The best swim courses are those that are parallel to the beach. For years, my
swimming friends and I have swum parallel to shore along a buoy line that

--- Page 71 Text ---
stretches the length of the beach or just outside the wave break. There is no real
need to swim out into deep water, especially when most boaters, windsurfers,
kite surfers, and Jet Skiers are not looking for swimmers far offshore.
Walk along the beach and observe the training area. You will be able to see
various landmarks, and when you enter the water, you’ll recognize them and use
them for navigation and to indicate the distance you have swum.

--- Page 72 Text ---
TIDAL CHARTS
Before any long-distance swim, you want to check the tides. Even when you’re
doing training swims, check on the tides. The swimmers at the South End
Rowing Club in San Francisco always check the tides before they swim, because
if they don’t time the tide and their swim correctly, they can’t make it back to the
club. Tides will affect your workout times. If you swim back and forth along the
coast, you will have the tide with you and against you, and you’ll be able to see
if you’re on your pace, but if you’re swimming only in one direction, it’s hard to
tell how fast you are going and whether you’re fighting the tide or getting a
push.
L. Tadeus said that the SEALs use tide tables to figure out training swims:
You can find tide tables online easily. They are based on observations
at specific locations—choose the one closest to your swim. A local
marina near the swim location would have the most accurate charts.
Occasionally, you get lucky and a particular section of a body of water
has been thoroughly studied for some tangential purpose for which
tides were necessary. Tidal predictions for these areas tend to be
hyperaccurate but require creative research techniques to locate.
Tidal charts are very specific. The tides in the English Channel are different,
for example, from the Irish Sea. Tidal charts are good only one year, because the
tides change annually.

--- Page 73 Text ---
WATER TEMPERATURE
Always check the water temperature before you swim; it will give you an
indication of how long you can swim that day. You’ll also need to be aware of
how you are feeling in the water, if you’re too cold or too hot.
It is a good idea to have a journal to record the water temperature and your
swim time and distance and how you felt during your workout, so you can see
whether you’re acclimating to the water temperature.
The water temperature is a good indicator of your estimated time in the water.
When I first started training for the Strait of Magellan swim, the water
temperature was forty-two degrees—eight degrees colder than the waters off
Santa Barbara, California, where I did the majority of training for the swim.
Eight degrees was a huge difference. The water in the Strait of Magellan felt so
much colder than the Pacific. The first day I could stand in waist-deep water for
twenty minutes. The next day I talked myself into swimming for twenty minutes,
and I gradually added more time for each workout as I acclimated to the cold.
The water temperature indicated how frequently I would drink warm fluids.
Water temperature also played a major role in my Gulf of Aqaba swims. There
the water temperature was eighty degrees, and the air temperature was ninety
degrees Fahrenheit. By learning how hot the air and water were, I realized that I
needed to slow down so I wouldn’t go into hyperthermia (overheating during the
swim), and I knew I had to drink cool fluids every twenty minutes. Just as I got
acclimated to the cold waters off Chile, I had to acclimate to the hot water
temperatures between Egypt, Israel, and Jordan.

--- Page 74 Text ---
WATER QUALITY
Many of us swim because it is fun and something that makes us healthy and
happy. Swimming in the ocean adds a lot to our lives. But water quality
fluctuates daily depending on the waterway, the time of year, and what might
have been dumped in the waterway. We need to pay attention.
Nick Bolin, the Seal Beach, California, safety officer/lifeguard, offered the
following comments and recommendations:
~ Water quality can be a concern when swimming in the ocean. Many counties regularly check the
water quality. If water contamination is detected, lifeguards and coastal agencies are notified, and
signs are posted on the beach advising swimmers and surfers not to enter the water. Always check
with the lifeguards or county health departments about water quality before you enter the water. For
example, the Orange County Health Care Agency states: “The Environmental Health staff advised
swimmers that levels of bacteria can rise significantly in the ocean and bay waters adjacent to storm
drains, creeks and rivers during and after rainstorms. The elevated levels of bacteria can continue for
a period of at least 3 days depending upon the intensity of the rain and the volume of the runoff.
Swimmers should avoid coastal waters impacted by discharging storm drains, creeks and rivers, and
beach users should avoid contact with any runoff on the beach during dry or wet weather conditions.”
~ Because water quality is dependent on so many factors and thus in constant flux, be sure to
check with the state health department on water quality before you get into the water.
~ Don’t swim during moderate to heavy rainstorms and especially near storm drains. A Navy
SEAL said that they have experienced serious problems with water quality in such conditions. He
said, “We had an entire dive team come down with skin lesions all over their bodies after a good rain
in Pearl Harbor. At first, the Dive Medical Officers suspected cutus marmorata, a form of
decompression illness. Turns out they had chemical burns from runoff contaminated by all the crystal
meth labs in the mountains of Oahu. Beaches are always closing on the south shore of Oahu due to
sewage spills.”
All sorts of contaminants wash into the water when it’s raining, as well as a lot
of debris. I’ve run headfirst into floating logs and garbage. You may not want to
miss your ocean workouts, but if you’re swimming in polluted water, you can
contract an infection from high levels of bacteria and be out of the water a lot
longer than a few days. This happened to me after swimming in Santa Monica
Bay one day after a heavy rain. A group of swimmers who worked out in the
area all the time said that the water was fine. What I realized later was that they
might have built up some immunity to the bacteria in the water. I had my first
bad sinus infection, and I had to stay out of the water for two weeks.

--- Page 75 Text ---
FOOD AND HYDRATION
One of the questions that I’m asked most often is: What do open water
swimmers eat and drink during their swims?
Years ago, in Egypt, Kevin Murphy, one of the most accomplished open
swimmers of all time, took me under his wing. Kevin was one of the funniest,
kindest, and zaniest swimmers I’d ever met. Once, in Cairo, we were late for our
workouts. At that time Kevin was competing for the title of swimming the
English Channel the most number of times. I remember asking him, “What do
you eat during your long swims?” He said, “Rice pudding and warm black tea.”
I asked him why.
“Because it goes down as easily as it comes back up.”
This did not seem like a good idea to me, and since then he’s found a better
solution for his swims. In long-distance open water swimming, you need to be
able to hold down what you’re eating and drinking. You don’t want to vomit
food and lose electrolytes—your energy source—and become dehydrated, and
possibly attract dangerous fish.
Through the years, I’ve tried all kinds of drinks and foods. Quaker Oats
helped sponsor my Beagle Channel swim. Before I traveled to Argentina, the
CEO of Quaker Oats invited me to their laboratory to meet with the biochemist
who created new flavored drinks for Gatorade and Quaker Oats.
The head of the research division led the way down white corridors to a lab
where two biochemists, wearing white lab coats and thick glasses, both around
thirty years old, told me that they were interested in developing a higher-
carbohydrate drink that could be used for endurance sports. They wanted me to
test it. They had been working to add mango to their sports drinks, and when
they asked if that appealed and it didn’t, they offered to create a new flavor for
me.
The Beagle Channel, between Argentina and Chile, was my next scheduled
swim. It had never been attempted. The water was cold, in the low forties, and
the sea was very rough, due to frequent storms. “Could they create a tropical
drink that would make me think of swimming between tropical islands? Could
you make a piña colada carbo-load drink?”
The head of the research division smiled. He said he had grown up in India,
and he drank a lot of coconut milk, and that the flavor might be good for
endurance sports, but you would probably want to use a light coconut flavor. The
two scientists began discussing the biochemistry formulas for flavor. They spoke

--- Page 76 Text ---
in numbers and codes because they had to keep their inventions secret. They
turned to me and asked questions: “Do you want the drink to be sweet or only
slightly sweet? Do you want it acidic, slightly acidic, or not acidic at all? Do you
want more coconut flavor or more pineapple?” Each time they asked a question,
they closed their eyes and pursed their lips as if sampling the drink they were
creating in their minds.
The head of the research division also became excited about the idea of piña
colada. He said he had grown up drinking pineapple juice, too, and he thought
that the pineapple flavor was very nice but probably needed to be subtler than
the coconut. The flavor scientists nodded in agreement, but they were looking
intently at me, waiting for me to answer their questions.
The creamy flavor of the coconut might soothe my throat, and the not-too-
sweet pineapple without acid would cut the salt residue in my mouth during the
swim. The only downside of the drink was that it sounded delicious cold, but I
wasn’t sure how it would taste warm. On a long swim in cold water, you need to
be able to drink it warm in order to warm your core. How would hot pineapple
taste?
Their brows furrowed as they considered how the flavor would be altered
when they heated the drink. The head of the research division said, “Well, that is
your new challenge,” and they nodded and smiled and then asked me, “Do you
want the drink in powder form or in liquid? Powder might be easier if you’re
traveling; you can just add it to water, and it’s a lot lighter than carrying liquid.”
A few months later, a large jar of powdered piña colada carbo-load arrived
from their labs, and I tested it during my workouts. It tasted good when it was
cool but not as good when it was hot. I was also concerned about drinking too
much of the high-carbohydrate drink. I had not had a problem before, but friends
who were marathon runners and cyclists told me that high-carbohydrate drinks
could cause gas and diarrhea—not something you want to experience on any
long-distance event. I made sure not to drink too much, and it gave me energy,
although I like simple natural warm apple juice better, and I enjoy soft oatmeal
raisin cookies because they float, and at times throughout a long swim, I want to
eat something solid, not only drink fluids. I continued to search for foods and
drinks that could be used on long swims, and discovered that my college
roommates, who were Olympic swimmers, ate bowls of oatmeal before their big
competitions. They said the oatmeal had staying power; they did not get hungry
before their races, and it gave them energy.
Oatmeal works for me for the same reasons. But this quest to find what will
work best before and during a long swim is something that continues to interest
me. When I was on a speaking tour in Canada, I stayed a few nights at the Prince

--- Page 77 Text ---
of Wales Hotel, and I tried their crème brûlée oatmeal. It was the best oatmeal I
had ever eaten. I got up very early those two mornings so I had time to swim in
the hotel pool, and during the workout, I looked forward to a steaming bowl of
crème brûlée oatmeal, made with grainy steel-cut oats that had a nutty flavor,
and plump apple slices, perfectly cooked, as if they had been stolen from an
apple tart. The apples, perhaps Fuji or Pink Lady, were infused with cinnamon
and nutmeg, mixed into the oatmeal, and covered with a fine layer of crème
brûlée custard, then topped with a swizzle of real Canadian maple syrup. Some
of it remained as golden syrup, and some of it was flamed momentarily until it
was paper-thin crisp maple candy. While I worked out, I tried to figure out how
this memorable breakfast feast could be made into an oatmeal cookie, but it
might lend itself better to an oatmeal-apple muffin injected with a heart of crème
brûlée.
As athletes, we always look for food/drinks that will be easy to eat and drink,
that will digest easily, and most important, give us the sustained energy for
endurance and the burst of energy we need for sprints, as well as be something
we can look forward to during or even after a very long swim. It is interesting to
note that in the last couple of years, a drink that a lot of people are using during
endurance runs or triathlons is coconut water (serve it cool during warm swims),
and the flavor researchers, chemists, and I created a variation on the coconut
flavor more than thirty years ago.
Here are variables that affect food and drink choices:
~ If you’re swimming in cold water, you will be looking for something warm to drink and eat to
help warm your body and give you energy.
~ If you’re swimming in warm water, you’ll be looking for cool drinks and foods to help cool your
body.
~ If you’re swimming in cold salt water, you’ll look for drinks that are not high in salt content,
because you are already ingesting salt from the water.
~ If you’re swimming in warm salt water, you will want to find a drink that tastes good, cools the
body, and replaces electrolytes. If you’re drinking a lot of salt water during rough warm-water
swims, as I did in the Gulf of Aquaba, you might not want to add more salt to your system, and you
may decide to drink fresh water and/or dilute the sports drink, as a lot of endurance athletes do.
Whether you’re in cold or hot water, make sure to get enough hydration.
~ When you are using warm fluids during a swim, make sure they aren’t too hot, because your lips
will be cooled to the temperature of the water, and if the fluid is hot, it will feel as if you are burning
your lips.
~ In third-world countries, used bottles containing purified water are sometimes gathered up, filled
with tap water, and resealed. If the tap water is full of bacteria that your system is not accustomed to,
you can get sick. I’ve learned to purchase sparkling water (also called water with gas), because
sparkling water cannot be put back in a reused bottle. Unscrew the bottle cap and let the gas out for a
day or two before your swim or you’ll be burping while you’re swimming.
~ Salt water has a tendency to irritate the throat and make your tongue swell. If you are drinking

--- Page 78 Text ---
and eating something with an acid base, it will irritate your throat.
~ For most swimmers in salt water, drinks with a milk base, cheese, and chocolate do not digest
well.
~ High-carbohydrate drinks can cause gas, cramps, or gastric dumping (diarrhea).
Recently, I had breakfast with friends who are ultramarathon runners and
asked them what they ate before their races and during their hundred-mile runs.
Often they eat peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, something that open water
swimmers also eat, though we cut the sandwich into small pieces so they can be
eaten easily while treading water.
The ultramarathon runners also eat half an avocado on runs. The avocado
contains good fats that are not only healthy but also provide a long-term energy
supply. Given that a lot of open water swimmers are swimming in salty
environments, the avocado is something that is easy to eat, soothes the throat,
and tastes good with the salt in your mouth.
It is important to stay hydrated during your workouts and your long-distance
swims. The amount you hydrate depends on your own body’s needs as well as
water temperature and air temperature. Even in colder temperatures, you need to
make sure you’re drinking enough liquids.
Some swimmers hydrate before and after they swim, and on longer swims,
they have a paddler, kayaker, or boat support person carry their fluid and
sometimes a small cooler to keep their food chilled. The support people hand or
toss the water bottles and food to swimmers, who tread water, do an eggbeater
kick, or float. They do not touch the support craft or support people during the
feeding period. Under English Channel and Catalina Channel swimming rules,
and during competitive open water swims, swimmers will be disqualified if they
touch the support craft or support people. This is to ensure that they do not rest
on the side of the boat or support craft and complete their swim under their own
power.
When I swam the English Channel, I carried warm fluids in cleaned shampoo
bottles that I used as water bottles. I stopped every hour or two to hydrate and
feed. My father had advised me to feed every hour to maintain my blood sugar
level and energy level, but I wanted to break the world record and did not want
to waste time feeding, or stop and get cold. Years later, I realized that I made a
mistake. It would have been wiser to feed and drink more frequently and have
more energy to swim; I may have swum much faster.
Now most swimmers who are doing open water swims of ten miles (16
kilometers) or more feed or drink every twenty to thirty minutes, and most of
them use warm fluids, because the English Channel temperatures range from 56

--- Page 79 Text ---
to 66 degrees F (13.3 to 18.8 degrees C). Manufacturers such as L.L. Bean,
Eddie Bauer, and Starbucks have created insulated water bottles that are much
easier to use than shampoo bottles.
Some swimmers, such as Murph Renford, get seasick or don’t hold down food
very well. Murph has spent a lot of time working with a sports nutritionist to
figure out what he needs to eat. He said, “I have a gel, followed by 250
milliliters (8.4 ounces) of water at the one-hour mark, then every thirty minutes
thereafter for the duration of the swim.” Murph uses Shotz Energy Gel—always
mango passion, he tells me (see Sources for website address; this page). “It is far
from an exact science,” he continues, “but it seems to works for me. Having said
that, I hate feeding time, and I think a lot of this comes down to my seasickness
and dizziness when I stop swimming.”
Murph said that during his English Channel swim, he was feeding every forty-
five minutes with 600 milliliters (20.2 ounces) of water, but that amount was
hard to digest. For the Manhattan swim, he reduced the feeds to every forty
minutes with 400 milliliters (13.5 ounces) of water, and even that was too much
to digest. He added that a thirty-minute feed time with less water seemed to
work best for him.
He said the sports nutritionist recommended that he drink approximately
1,200 milliliters (40.5 ounces) of water/fluid every sixty minutes, which equates
to 600 milliliters (20.2 ounces) every thirty minutes, “and for me and, I believe,
most swimmers, this is not physically possible. I have no doubt that she is right,
but the practicality of achieving this as a swim progresses would be near
impossible.”
Everyone is different, and the most important thing regarding feeding is to
figure out what works best for you. There are swimmers who methodically test
different foods and liquids and are all set for their swims, and then they travel
overseas and meet swimmers who, with the best intentions, tell them that they’ve
got it wrong, they need to drink or eat something else. It is a mistake to try
something else a few days before a swim. It may not sit well, and can cause an
upset stomach and a bad swim.
L. Tadeus discussed food options with me. He said that when the trainees are
in intense training, they eat thousands of calories per day, and even then, some of
the trainees can’t hold on to their body weight. The trainers work on educating
the trainees about nutrition, and like athletes, each SEAL works on what will
work best for him. When L. Tadeus was a SEAL trainee, he and his buddy were
doing a five-mile swim. They were swimming the combat stroke, side by side,
when his swim buddy suddenly unzipped his wet suit and pulled out a plastic
bag with two slices of pizza inside and handed one to him. He said it was the

--- Page 80 Text ---
best pizza he had ever eaten.
When asked about supplements, L. Tadeus cautioned, “I believe you should
specifically mention avoiding creatine-filled supplements for endurance athletes.
We have had a couple of trainees overheat and nearly die from using this in the
program.”
To find out why this occurred, I contacted Charlie Nagurka, MD, an internist.
He wrote, “There is little reliable information available regarding creatine. Most
of the information on the Web is from sellers of supplements. It can cause kidney
damage” (see Sources for more information; this page).

--- Page 81 Text ---
Into the Open Water
Going from pool swimming to open water swimming is like going from a fish
tank to the ocean. Remember how badly Nemo wanted to escape the tank? The
swimming pool is a stable and controlled environment, and in the open water,
anything can happen. That’s what makes swimming in the open water
challenging, interesting, fun, and exciting. But because the water is always in
flux, open water swimmers need to be aware, alert, and always in tune with what
is happening around them. Otherwise, they can put themselves in dangerous
situations.
Walk the beach before you get into the water. Study the area where you will
be swimming. Can you see where the water goes from a lighter color to a darker
color? The darker blue indicates deeper water. This darker blue tells you where
the beach drops off and where you have to begin your swim. If this is an ocean
beach, the dark to light area often indicates where the waves will rise and begin
to break. All of this is important when you’re entering the water.

--- OCR from Page 81 Image 1 ---
Chapter 6
a

--- Page 82 Text ---
THE STINGRAY SHUFFLE
Stingrays are very common in tropical and semitropical waters. They are flat
fish, with eyes on top of their body and mouths on the underside. They conceal
themselves along sandy beaches to hide from prey. They use smell and
electroreceptors called ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the fish, crustaceans, and
mollusks that are their food source.
Stingrays have a long tail with a barbed stinger at the end. This stinger—
actually a modified dermal denticle—is used for self-defense. It is about an inch
long, and there are two grooves on the underside with venom glands. The stinger
is covered with a thin layer of skin called the integumentary sheath, where the
venom is concentrated. When the stinger breaks a human being’s skin, a protein-
based venom is released; sometimes the stinger breaks off and stays in the
wound.
Beach lifeguards along the California coast advise swimmers to shuffle or
drag their feet (do the “stingray shuffle”) when they enter and exit the water, so
that if they encounter a stingray, they bump it, and it swims off. If they step
down on the stingray, it instinctively reacts to protect itself and may sting the
swimmer.
It’s also important to be aware when you’re in the water. Erez Israeli, a friend
of mine from Israel, decided that he wanted to start swimming in the ocean. He
had swum in lakes and in the pool and traveled to Southern California to gain
more experience in open water swimming. On his first ocean swim, I swam with
him to see his strengths and what he needed to work on. Before we got into the
water, I explained about stingrays resting and how he should slide his feet when
he entered the water.
He did that, but when we were about chest-deep in the water, he was so intent
on learning new information that he forgot all about the stingrays and put his feet
down on the sand. Cringing, I told him that he needed to shuffle his feet to warn
the stingrays that he was there, and they would swim off without bothering him.
I told him about Fahmy Attallah, a long-distance swimmer, originally from
Egypt, who swam off Long Beach, California, daily into his nineties. Fahmy
always shuffled his feet when he entered the water. He swam breaststroke with
his head above water for up to an hour a day. In all those years of swimming he
had never been stung, but he didn’t realize he needed to shuffle his feet when he
exited the water, too.
After one morning swim, he was walking out of the water and stepped down

--- Page 83 Text ---
on a stingray. When the stingray stung him, Fahmy said it was like having a hot
poker stuck into his foot. His foot immediately swelled to three times its normal
size, and it throbbed with pain.
A Long Beach lifeguard saw Fahmy hobbling and helped him ashore. He
asked Fahmy if he was allergic to bee stings, and Fahmy told the lifeguard he
wasn’t. If Fahmy had shown signs of nausea, vomiting, chills, or muscle cramps,
the lifeguard would have had him transported to the emergency room to be
treated for an allergic reaction to the stingray venom. If Fahmy had been stung in
the hand, the lifeguard would have recommended that he remove any rings or
bracelets, as jewelry trapped on a swollen hand could cut off circulation.
Fahmy wasn’t experiencing any signs that indicated an allergic response. The
lifeguard administered first aid and had him sit down and place his foot in a
bucket of water, as hot as Fahmy could tolerate. The lifeguard let the wound
bleed so it would release venom from the sting and bacteria from the
surrounding environment. He explained that the most intense pain came on thirty
to ninety minutes after the sting, but the hot water would diminish it. (Stingray
venom is composed of heat-labile proteins; hot water will alter the polypeptide
protein molecule and deactivate the poison. Applying acid, such as orange juice,
urine, or vinegar, does not have any effect on the sting.)
An hour later, the lifeguard applied a topical antibiotic to Fahmy’s wound to
reduce the chance of infection, wrapped his foot with a clean bandage, and
advised him to continue soaking his foot in hot water for the next week and
check the wound for signs of infection, such as redness, prolonged swelling, or
pus. If this happened, he advised Fahmy to seek medical attention, as untreated
infections could result in loss of limbs or death.
It took about three weeks for the swelling in Fahmy’s foot to go down and the
wound to heal completely. He returned to the beach and made a point of
shuffling his feet when he got into the water. When he completed his workout,
he swam as close to shore as he could get, splashed the water, tentatively put one
foot down, and shuffled his way out of the water.
While death from stingrays is not common, Steve Irwin, an Australian
television celebrity and environmentalist, was killed off the Great Barrier Reef
when he swam on top of a stingray and the stingray’s barb went up and into his
chest and put a hole in his heart. An important reminder: When you’re in the
open water, keep in mind that you’re swimming with wild animals. It is best to
keep a safe distance.

--- Page 84 Text ---
WATER ENTRY
Nick Bolin, in addition to being a lifeguard, is a surfer, triathlete, and open water
swimmer. He is in tune with the ocean. He offered the following observations
and insights: “The ocean is dynamic, fluid, and always changing. In a matter of
hours, water conditions can go from what appears to be very calm and gentle to
turbulent seas. Ocean conditions are affected by a variety of different things,
such as water temperature, tides, surf, bottom contour, sandbars, wind, and
currents, just to name a few. It is always a good idea to check with your local
lifeguard agency before entering the water.”
Lifeguards are trained to spot rip currents and troublesome areas and can point
swimmers in the direction where it is safest to swim. It is always recommended
to swim at a beach that is guarded. Talk with the lifeguards and let them know
your swim plan and how long you plan to be out. Be open to the lifeguard’s
suggestions; some areas may be closed to swimming, while others have limits on
how far a swimmer can venture out. These limits are placed for safety reasons.
Variables such as vessel traffic and other water sports may be harmful to a
swimmer.
For the beginning open water swimmer: Start on a beach with very little or no
surf. You can gradually work your way into surf conditions, but remember that
even open water with little or no tide is a lot different from swimming in a pool.
It is always advised to swim with a buddy or a group. If you are new to open
water swimming, go with someone experienced who can help you get
comfortable in the new environment.
Nick Bolin offered the following recommendations for entering the water:
~ Enter slowly, and never dive headfirst.
~ If you need to get under a wave, always keep your hands out in front of you.
~ Wait for a lull in the surf to enter the water. (A lull is the calm between wave sets.)
~ Swim through the surf impact zone quickly to get to the “outside,” where waves are not
breaking.
It never occurred to me why it was so crucial to enter and exit the water this
way until years later, when I heard about a new junior guard who forgot to
extend his arms over his head while bodysurfing to shore. A wave slammed him
into the beach, and he lost all use of his arms and legs.
The United States Lifesaving Association recommends the following steps to
avoid spinal injury:

--- Page 85 Text ---
~ Swim near a lifeguard.
~ Check with lifeguards about current conditions before swimming.
~ Stop, watch, and walk into the water.
~ Don’t dive headfirst into any unknown water.
~ Don’t dive toward the bottom into oncoming waves.
~ Don’t stand with your back to the waves.
~ Don’t jump or dive from a cliff, pier, jetty, or bridge.
~ Avoid bodysurfing, body boarding, or surfing straight “over the falls.” Ride the shoulder.
~ In a “wipeout,” land as flat as possible with your hands out in front of you.
~ While bodysurfing, keep an arm out in front of you to protect your head and neck.
~ When in doubt, don’t dive—play it safe!

--- Page 86 Text ---
BODYSURFING
Bodysurfing and bobbing in waves are what first attracted me into the cold
Atlantic waters. Dave, my brother, and I bodysurfed along the New England
coast into narrow sandy beaches framed by enormous rocks and rugged
peninsulas where waves broke like thunder and water sprayed sky-high. We
loved the feeling of the white water breaking around our legs, the sudden lift and
bounce of the water, the awesome power and beauty of the funneling waves, and
the deep chill of the dark blue ocean.
As children, Dave and my two sisters, Laura and Ruth, and I bodysurfed in
small one-and two-foot waves. As teenagers, we spent our free time bodysurfing
in the Pacific Ocean along Long Beach, Seal Beach, and Huntington Beach.
We asked surfers for tips, like how we could extend our fun by extending our
rides. We asked them what to do when we were held down by big wave sets.
They told us to relax and hang out underwater until the large set passed. We
asked them what to do when we got spun around under the water and couldn’t
tell which direction was up. They told us to follow our bubbles back to the
surface.
For those who are starting out with open water swimming, it is important to
get good instruction on-site from local lifeguards, surfers, and experienced open
water swimmers. They study the waves and know when it is safe to go and when
it is not. They also will tell you where you don’t want to be in the surf zone.
Bodysurfing is like starts and turns in pool swimming. The speed at which you
enter and exit the water can determine whether you win a race or get safely off-
or onshore.
Thinking about the SEALs and their ability to handle all kinds of water
conditions, I asked L. Tadeus if the trainees have any special training for going
through the surf. He explained what the SEALs do:
~ Many of the SEAL trainees have a surfing background. They go through the surf with a buddy,
and they have instructors who are lifeguards, watching them get through the surf zone.
~ When going through the surf zone, ideally, a swimmer should swim beneath the wave about two
to three feet and keep breaststroking forward to get himself past the plunging wave faster. The
surfing term for this is “duck diving.” The reason we teach this is because water is fairly
incompressible, and most of the turbulence from the wave action—regardless of wave size—is
limited to the first couple of feet below the plunging wave. You still feel a surge of water, but not the
washing machine effect.
~ If a swimmer is caught by a wave, certainly, curling up and protecting the head is warranted—in
fact, recommended, especially in the case of coral reefs under really heavy surf.
~ The trick is to protect your head and core from major impact damage and, in the case of a diver,

--- Page 87 Text ---
from the equipment being worn.

--- Page 88 Text ---
WAVES
Waves are part of what makes open water swimming very different from pool
swimming. They make open water swimming more fun and more challenging
than swimming in a predictable swimming pool. Waves also make the swimmer
stronger and more aware of and connected to the environment.
According to the NOAA National Weather Service, waves are created by three
components: wind strength, as the wind must be moving faster than the wave
crests for energy to be transferred; wind duration, since a strong wind that does
not blow for a long period will not generate large waves; and wind fetch, the
uninterrupted distance over which the wind blows without significant change in
direction. An interesting aside: The Pacific Ocean has the largest uninterrupted
water surface, so waves in the Pacific can grow larger than in any of the other
oceans in the world.
After the wind has blown for a period of time, the waves grow higher from the
trough (the bottom of the wave) to the crest (the top of the wave), and both the
wavelength and wave period (the time interval between the arrival of
consecutive crests at a stationary point) become longer. As the wind continues
blowing or strengthening in force, the water first forms whitecaps, and then the
waves break. This is known as a fully developed sea.
The waves in a fully developed sea move faster than the storm that creates
them, lengthening and reducing in height in the process. These are called swell
waves. Swells organize into groups that are smooth and regular in appearance.
They are able to travel thousands of miles unchanged in height and wave period.
The longer the wave, the faster it travels. As waves leave storm areas, they
tend to sort themselves out with the long ones ahead of the short ones, and the
energy is simultaneously spread out over an increasingly larger area. As the
waves close in on the coast, they begin to feel the bottom, and their direction of
travel might change due to the contour of the land. Eventually, the waves run
ashore, increasing in height up to one and a half times their height in deep water,
finally breaking up as surf.
Getting in and out of the impact zone is one of the most important
considerations when open water swimming.

--- Page 89 Text ---
SURF
Sean Collins, formerly the president, chief surf forecaster, and founder of
Surfline, a worldwide source for wave forecasting, spent most of his life surfing
the world’s big waves and sailing across the great oceans. Through these
experiences, he thoroughly studied weather systems, their movements, and when
and where the storm systems would generate winds and surf.
Over the past twenty-five years, Sean honed his research and observation
skills and developed a sophisticated proprietary system of wave forecasting,
much of which is currently used in LOLA, Surfline’s global swell model.
These wave forecasts are available at Surfline.com. Surfline has provided
weather and forecasting services to every lifeguard agency in California, the
Coast Guard, U.S. Navy SEALs, the National Weather Service, numerous
television and movie production companies, multiple domestic and international
governmental agencies, and nearly every surf company in the world.
Sean was a pioneer in surf monitoring and developed the first live “surfcam”
in 1996, the precedent for the famous camera network available on Surfline.com
today. In July 2008, Sean was inducted into the Surfers’ Hall of Fame, with his
footprints and handprints immortalized in stone on the corner of Pacific Coast
Highway and Main Street in Huntington Beach.
Sean was the source of big wave forecasts for the big wave riders, including
Mike Parsons, Brad Gerlach, Shane Dorian, Laird Hamilton, Greg and Rusty
Long, Jamie Sterling, and many more. Sean surfed and explored waves by land,
air, and sea for over forty years. He passed his knowledge on to his son, and they
spent their time together surfing in the secret surf spot south of the border. In the
spirit of sharing his knowledge with others, Sean provided the following
guidelines for swimmers who are planning to swim in the ocean:
~ Before swimmers go to the beach, they should check the surf report and see if there is surf. You
can check with Surfline.com and the National Weather Service.
~ Talk with the lifeguards about the surf before you get in the water.
~ Watch the water for fifteen minutes before you enter. Look out at the waves. Look in front of the
wave break close to shore. Look right at the wave break, and look outside the waves; the current is
different in every one of these areas, and the current is different every day.
Sean cautioned, “One of the most dangerous areas in the ocean is the surf
zone. It’s where you have multiple forces meeting. You have surf compressing
against shallow water and sand, and you have currents near shore, and they are
stronger in the surf zone. Everything in the surf zone is being compressed

--- Page 90 Text ---
against the hard surface of the sand. You will also have the surf beat, where the
water is being trapped on the beach. This water has to escape and flow out, and
this creates another current.”
Sean was describing a rip current, which can carry a swimmer far offshore.
How to get out of one will be discussed shortly, but Sean recommends first
knowing how to identify a rip current in order to avoid it:
~ Watch how the water is moving and how it is traveling from one area to another.
~ Watch the water fifty feet from shore and find pieces of kelp, foam, things that float in, and see
how they move or don’t move.
~ Look farther out and see how these telltales are moving.
~ Walk the beach before you swim and watch the water and how it moves.
Rip currents can also be used as an advantage. SEALs note where the rips are
occurring and use them to assist through the surf zone. They also use rips to take
boats through the “boat zone.” They have found that many people who drown in
the ocean do so because they find themselves being pushed out to sea, then swim
against this current until they tire out completely and succumb. The remedy to
this situation is to swim perpendicularly until you are out of the rip.
Sean added, “The ocean is magical. Everything is constantly changing. The
secret is to see what the ocean is trying to communicate to you, and you
recognize it, and you adjust to the ocean’s mood. It is important to understand
what is happening in the ocean before you get in the water. You can’t count on
someone saving you; you need to anticipate what the changing conditions will
be. Think about how things are going to change during your swim, before you
even start, so you will be able to react to the water.”

--- Page 91 Text ---
ROLE OF THE TIDES
Sean Collins explained the way the tides affect the surf and the route of your
swims: “Tides are connected to the moon and sun. Tidal currents are strongest
near an inlet or bay. It’s important to understand when it is high tide and when
the highest high or the lowest low will occur. This happens in the middle of the
tide, not at the end of a tide. If the water movement is very strong, it will push
you way off course or out of the bay. You need to know what the water is doing
before you get in.”
Sean advised using certain signs and telltales as references:
~ If you are trying to figure out what the wind will be doing, look at the freighters offshore. They
are always pointed into the wind.
~ The wind usually starts offshore from a higher altitude. Look at the treetops and flagpoles, and
you will be able to forecast which direction the wind will blow across the water. Think of air as you
would water. A high-pressure area will flow to a low-pressure area to equalize itself, just like water
moves to equalize itself.
Sean has observed nature and studied charts to create forecasts; he has also
used his hearing. He said, “I figured out that where there is a high-pressure area
moving in, the sounds you hear around you make a small echo. You hear that
echo and know that a high-pressure system is on land. The winds die, and the
waves get really good. The high-pressure systems press down on the land and
cause the sound waves to change.”

--- Page 92 Text ---
SWELL PREDICTION
From Sean’s kitchen window, we watched the surf breaking along the shores of
Seal Beach. For four or five different swells, Sean observed the angle they hit
the beach, the size of the waves, and the time between the waves. In this way,
Sean could tell where the waves originated. He tracked the origin of storms and
their movements around the world. Based on the speed of the storm’s movement
and the energy the wind put into the water in the form of waves, Sean could tell
from the angles at which the waves hit the beach, and by the time between the
waves, where each wave came from. Each wave had its own unique fingerprint,
Sean said. He saw two waves hit the beach and said they came from a storm off
Fiji, and then he saw one coming from a storm off Hawaii.
Sean gave the following directions for entering the surf zone:
~ Watch the waves break.
~ Surf comes in sets, and there are calm periods in between, known as lulls.
~ Time your entry or exit during the lull period.
~ Big lulls occur between big sets of waves.
~ Understand ocean-floor contours. Waves break because they are moving over shallow water.
Waves rise up, become unstable, and break.
L. Tadeus noted another surfer rule of thumb: Waves break twice as high as
the water is deep. The wave may break, then fade briefly, then break again as it
moves over the contours of the ocean floor. Understanding underwater
hydrography is exceedingly important to any competent waterman.
To understand the way the water is moving, Sean suggested that you:
~ Watch some waves break. It is usually better to swim through deep water than shallow water, but
watch beforehand to make sure there isn’t a lot of current in the deep-water areas.
~ Talk to fishermen about the currents. Fish like currents. Where there is current, the fish start to
feed. Fish have a great sense of smell. They start smelling other fish when there is current. The
current takes the scent and moves it around. Fishermen are tuned into tides and currents.
~ Talk to the pros who are on the water every day.
~ Figure out the current and watch the surf line, the winds, and the waves.
~ Don’t let something happen and then have to figure out what to do. Be aware before you swim.

--- Page 93 Text ---
MOVING THROUGH THE SURF
Nick Bolin offered additional advice for getting through the surf zone.
~ Look ahead to see the approaching waves/set.
~ If a wave breaks right in front of you or a wall of whitewash is coming at you, take a deep breath
and swim toward the bottom. This allows the swimmer to get underneath the breaking wave.
~ Once the wave passes, return to the surface. Look ahead to see if other waves are approaching.
~ Try to make your way through the surf zone quickly. Once you’re on the outside area of the
breaking waves, it is generally much calmer.
OVER OUR HEADS: DISTRESS SIGNALS
The ocean changes rapidly. Even though we try to get the best information
before we swim, and make the best judgments, sometimes we need some help.
There is nothing wrong with asking for help. It is far better to be embarrassed
and avoid getting hurt.
There are certain distress signals to let lifeguards know that you are in trouble
or in need of assistance.
~ Call out for help.
~ Wave your arms to gather attention.
~ Relax; try not to panic.
~ Don’t fight the current.

--- Page 94 Text ---
RIPTIDES
Before you swim, check with the NOAA/National Weather Service for surf zone
forecasts. They will contain information about potential riptides in the area
where you’ll be swimming. NOAA has a listing of rip currents called “Rip
Current Outlooks,” listing the risk from low to high:
~ Low risk of rip currents: Wind and/or wave conditions are not strong enough to create rip
currents.
~ Moderate risk of rip currents: Wind and/or wave conditions support stronger or more frequent rip
currents. Only experienced surf swimmers should enter the water.
~ High risk of rip currents: Wind and/or wave conditions support dangerous rip currents. Rip
currents are life threatening to anyone entering the surf. Rip currents may be moderate or high risks,
especially in the areas around jetties and piers.
~ When you arrive at the beach, speak with on-duty lifeguards about rip currents and all other
water conditions expected for the day.
NOAA also advises:
~ Know the meaning of and obey warnings represented by colored beach flags.
~ Take your cell phone to the beach. In case of an emergency, if the lifeguard is not present, call
911.
Different beaches may use different colors, but here is a commonly used
series:
~ Double red: beach is closed to the public.
~ Single red: high hazard; for example, strong surf or currents.
~ Yellow: medium hazard.
~ Green: calm conditions, although caution is still necessary.
~ Purple (flown with either red or yellow): dangerous marine life but not sharks.
Ways to Identify a Riptide
You can often spot the areas where there are riptides. They typically happen
when a lot of surf piles up on the beach and the water needs to flow back into the
ocean. You will see areas of discolored sandy water that are roughly ten to fifty
feet wide and flowing out into the ocean. They look like small streams of murky
water.
~ Before you get into the water, ask the lifeguard about the conditions.
~ Never swim alone.

--- Page 95 Text ---
~ Never swim at night. Rip currents can be more dangerous at night simply because you cannot
see them.
~ Stay at least a hundred feet away from piers and jetties. Permanent rip currents often exist
alongside these structures.
~ Use polarized sunglasses. They will help you to spot signatures of rip currents by cutting down
glare and sunlight reflected off the ocean’s surface.
~ Avoid the “it won’t/didn’t happen to me” syndrome. Obey all instructions/orders from lifeguards
and posted signs.
Caught in a Rip
~ Remain calm. You will not be pulled under the surface of the water.
~ Swim parallel to the shore only to escape the current. As soon as you are out of the current, only
then swim toward the beach. Do not swim directly against the current. It will be too strong for you.
~ Another option is to float. Eventually, you will reach the end of the current. Then either:
~ Swim parallel to the shore to get out of the path of the rip current and, once you do so, only then
swim toward the beach; or:
~ Draw attention to yourself by waving your arms and yelling for help (which you can do because
you are not swimming alone … right?).

--- Page 96 Text ---
WATER EXIT
After you’ve completed a workout, if you’ve worked hard, you’re tired, but you
need to concentrate and be aware of what the surf is doing so you know how get
in to shore.
Nick Bolin offered the following advice regarding exiting the water:
~ As you swim toward the shore, check behind you to see if there are waves. Try to determine the
depth of the water if possible, as that can be indicative of when the waves will start breaking. Swim a
couple of strokes on your back, or stop and look back to see if there are approaching waves.
~ It is possible to catch a wave and ride it in to the shore. Although bodysurfing may look easy, it
is actually more difficult than it looks. You must be swimming at a good rate of speed to catch a
wave just as it is breaking and have a chance of riding it in. Most important, if you are attempting to
catch a wave, make sure your hands are out in front of you at all times. A shallow spot or sandbar
may present itself at any moment. By keeping your hands out in front, you are protecting your head
and neck from slamming into the ocean bottom.
~ Sometimes conditions are rough and not conducive to wave riding. As when you enter the water,
you may have to take a deep breath, swim toward the bottom, and let the wave pass over the top of
you. By not swimming deep enough or coming up too early, swimmers jeopardize themselves and get
caught in the wave. The wave will pick you up, sometimes referred to as going over the falls or
getting caught in the washing machine cycle.
If you go over the falls, L. Tadeus said, “I recommend curling into a ball,
because: 1. If you are near coral reefs, extending extremities can get wedged
between coral heads though your body is still moving (ouch); 2. Balling up
protects the head and core as you tumble across the bottom; 3. You get out of the
washing machine faster because you expose less ‘sail’ area to the water action.
The safest way to go through the surf is duck diving—doing a shallow dive
under the wave.”
Most important, keep an eye out to sea as you near the shore. Start with small
surf and work into larger surf as your comfort and swim level allow. If you are
unsure about going out, then don’t. Surf varies from beach to beach. Although
one beach may be experiencing a large swell, a lot of times you can drive just a
few miles and find another area with smaller surf.
For more information about safe swimming in the ocean, water conditions,
and up-to-date news, check out the American Lifeguard Association or the
United States Lifesaving Association. The United States Lifeguard Association
has a training manual that they use to instruct beach lifeguards. The manual is
full of helpful health and safety information. See Sources for each organization’s
website address; this page.

--- Page 97 Text ---
Effects of Heat and Cold
For over thirty years, I’ve been involved in research on cold acclimatization and
hypothermia. Researchers, physicians, and physiologists at the University of
California, Santa Barbara, in the Institute of Environmental Stress, began
studying my ability to acclimate to cold during my freshman year of college.
Their objectives were to discover how people acclimate to the cold, to find better
ways to recover from cold exposure, and to increase survival time in cold
environments. They had done a number of heat studies on world-class marathon
runners, including Jackie Hansen, a world record holder. The scientists said that
most people would not volunteer to be in cold studies.
They knew that I had trained with Don Gambril, who had coached the U.S.
Olympic team, and that I had swum across the English and Catalina Channels
and had broken the men’s and women’s world records, and they thought I had
somehow acclimated to the cold. They also knew that I was training to become
the first person to swim across the Strait of Magellan.
The team of researchers believed that what they discovered from studying me
could help people survive in the cold. They wanted to develop better methods for
rewarming people, and to know how the human body acclimated to the cold.
They also said that their studies would contribute to basic medical research.
They thought that, through their studies, physicians might find better ways to
cool people for heart surgery, as well as ways to use the cold to reduce
inflammation from head and spinal injury. In return, they would teach me
advanced physiology that might help me with my open water swimming goals.
The team of researchers—led by Dr. Steven Horvath, Dr. Barbara Drinkwater,
Dr. William McCafferty, and graduate student Annie Loucks—and a group of
physicians and graduate students began conducting a series of studies on me in
cold rooms at the institute, in a cold tank of water, and before and after my cold-

--- OCR from Page 97 Image 1 ---
Chapter 7
A SS. as

--- Page 98 Text ---
water training swims off the shores of Goleta, California. What they observed
surprised them.

--- Page 99 Text ---
COLD ACCLIMATIZATION
When most people swim in cold water, they pump the warm blood from their
core to their extremities. The blood in the extremities is not as insulated as it is
in the core, and it absorbs cold from the surrounding water. When the blood from
the extremities circulates back to the core, body temperature drops. The
researchers found that I responded differently to the cold. I was able to keep the
blood in the core of my body instead of pumping it out to my extremities. They
saw that I had a well-distributed layer of body fat that helped to insulate my
body and keep my core warm; plus, I was in great shape and able to swim for
miles at 70 to 80 percent of my maximum physical ability because I had worked
with some of the top coaches in the world, including my older brother, Dave.
During the intense physical workouts, my body created more heat than it lost.
This cold research gained the attention of Dr. William R. Keatinge, the
world’s expert on hypothermia. He was visiting the research team at UCSB
when they introduced him to me. He began doing a series of blood flow and
infrared studies on me at the University of London.
The researchers at UCSB and University of London discovered that my body
had acclimated to the cold. They had me swim tethered in a 42-degree F (5.5-
degree C) tank of cold water and monitored me. After a four-hour swim in 50-
degree F (10-degree C) water, my core temperature increased to 102.2 degrees F
(39 degrees C). The researchers were astonished. We repeated the test four times
to confirm the findings.
The scientists were extremely excited. This acclimatization process was
something that had been observed by the great Norwegian polar explorers
Fridtjof Nansen, the first European to cross the frigid Greenland ice cap; and
Roald Amundsen, the first man to reach the brutally cold South Pole. They
understood it over a hundred years ago. In order to cross the Greenland ice cap
or reach the South Pole, they needed to train and sleep in cold environments to
acclimate. Their conditioning made all the difference.
On his crossing of the Greenland ice cap, Nansen experienced 70 degrees
below F (56.6 degrees below C). The air inside his reindeer tent was so cold that
it fogged with his breath, and the condensation of his breath turned to ice on his
beard. Amundsen emulated Nansen: He skied during the long cold Norwegian
winters and slept with his bedroom window open at times when temperatures
plummeted to 40 degrees below F (40 degrees below C). They endured
temperatures that most humans have never experienced.

--- Page 100 Text ---
Acclimating to the cold water has taken me many years of intense training and
increased exposure to the cold, as well as a gradual drop in cold-water
temperatures. My coldest swim to date was in May 2007, off the shores of Disko
Bay, Greenland, where the water temperature ranged from 26.6 to 28.8 degrees F
(3 degrees below to 1.8 degrees C) and I swam a quarter of a mile in five
minutes and ten seconds.
Brownie Schoene, a Wilderness Medicine physician, pulmonary specialist,
researcher, and friend helped me prepare for swims that had never been done
before. He told me how differently unacclimated people respond to cold water.
During a trip to Antarctica, Brownie was the ship’s physician. He recounted a
story about three men in a Zodiac who fell overboard in 32-to 33-degree F (0 to
1 degree C) water. Brownie said one man stayed by the Zodiac boat. The second
man swam halfway back to the ship, about one hundred yards, before he was
picked up by a support boat. The third man swam about two hundred yards to the
ship.
The ship’s medics cared for the victims and, in their evaluations, measured the
temperatures of the individuals and discovered that the man with the highest core
temperature was the one who had stayed beside the Zodiac, curled up in a ball;
the man who was halfway back to the ship had a lower core temperature; and the
man who swam all the way back to the ship had the lowest core temperature.
None of them had trained in water, and none had acclimated to the cold. As a
result, their body temperatures dropped rapidly in the cold water, but the one
who had exposed less of his body’s surface area to the cold water underwent the
least loss of body heat. In other words, the potent convective force of the flow of
very cold water, which wicks away heat, had the greatest effect on those who
tried to swim. Brownie said that this event provided cogent lessons in both
optimizing survival as well as thermal physiology. These results are consistent
with those who swam farther having more blood flow to the arms and legs, more
heat loss, and thus, greater decrease in core temperature. It also underscored the
need for swimmers to acclimate to cold water.
My process for acclimating to the cold began at age fourteen, when a group of
teenagers invited me to swim across the Catalina Channel. My father, a
physician, knew about cold acclimatization and advised us to train in cool
waters, to wear light clothing and sandals, and to sleep with our bedroom
windows open. This would condition our bodies to cooler environments. The
water temperature was in the high sixties when we swam across the Catalina
Channel, and I learned that if you are not swimming at your normal speed and
creating heat, you will gradually lose heat and be cold throughout the swim.
After the Catalina Channel, my goal became the English Channel. At first I

--- Page 101 Text ---
trained in the Pacific, in water temperatures ranging from 50 to 70 degrees F (10
to 20 degrees C), and in swimming pools that were between 76 to 78 degrees F
(24.4 to 25.5 degrees C).
Quickly, it became evident that training in a swimming pool did not help me
acclimate to the cold water. During my training swims in the pool, my face
turned bright red, and sweat streamed down my face; my body was overheating.
I decided to train only in the ocean. At ages fifteen and sixteen, I swam across
the English Channel and broke the men’s and women’s world records twice.
Many people who attempt the English Channel have problems staying warm.
Some have gone into hypothermia—a body temperature below 95 degrees F (35
degrees C)—and a handful of swimmers have died from hypothermia when their
core temperature dropped too far. The way I had acclimated enabled me to swim
in the cool waters of the English Channel. Not everyone can acclimate to the
cold. Some do it better than others, and some can acclimate to heat, while others
can’t. I am not good at swimming in warm or hot waters; I overheat.
Heat is an equally important consideration in open water swimming. Just as
hypothermia (a lowered core body temperature) is dangerous for swimmers, so,
too, is hyperthermia (a high core temperature).

--- Page 102 Text ---
HYPERTHERMIA AND HYPOTHERMIA
Hyperthermia and hypothermia are two potentially life-threatening conditions
that swimmers can experience if they have not acclimated. Hyperthermia is
defined as a dangerously high core temperature, and hypothermia is a
dangerously low core temperature.
Because hyperthermia and hypothermia may affect swimmers’ judgment
during their swims, they may not realize that they are in danger. It is very
important to have a safety person on the support boat who can recognize the
symptoms of hypothermia or hyperthermia—which include shivering, purple
lips, splayed fingers, purple shoulders, disorientation, and confusion—and tell
the swimmer that he or she must stop. Swimmers experiencing hyperthermia or
hypothermia cannot be relied upon to be their own voice of reason.
Hyperthermia is a body temperature greater than 101.3 degrees F (38.5
degrees C). It occurs when the person’s body produces or absorbs more heat than
it can give off, whereupon the heat-regulating mechanisms of the body become
overwhelmed and are not able to expel excess heat. This may cause body
temperature to climb uncontrollably. It is a medical emergency, and the
individual should get immediate medical treatment to prevent injury or death.
In severe cases, the person’s temperature can exceed 104 degrees F (40
degrees C). Significant physical exertion on a very hot day or swimming in hot
tropical waters can generate heat beyond a healthy person’s ability to cool
himself or herself, since heat and humidity reduce the efficiency of the body’s
normal cooling mechanisms (such as vasodilation and sweating). During
strenuous exercise, heat production in the body is increased ten to twenty times.
This is something to be aware of when swimming in warm water. Fran
Crippen, an Olympic silver medalist and one of the world’s top open water
swimmers, died of hyperthermia during an international competition off the
shores of Dubai. He overheated during the race, but no one noticed that he was
in trouble. Fran recognized the critical importance of having an adequate number
of support boats, kayakers, and safety crew to watch over the swimmers during
the race, but sadly, his suggestions were not followed. His death made officials
examine the cause of his death and ways to implement more safety measures to
make people aware of the possibility of hyperthermia during open water
swimming and how to prevent it.
Sweating and vasodilatation are the major mechanisms of heat loss to
maintain your body core temperature. Dr. Gordon Giesbrecht, an expert in

--- Page 103 Text ---
environmental stress at the University of Manitoba, explained,
Hyperthermia is caused by increased heat production through exercise
in a warm/hot, often humid environment. As ambient temperature
increases, the temperature gradient for heat to be lost from the body
decreases, and body heat builds up. The purpose of sweating is to
provide a fluid that can evaporate from the body surface or within the
contacting layers of clothes. The process of evaporation (changing the
state of liquid from liquid to gas) requires energy; therefore,
evaporation from the skin or clothing takes heat away from the body.
As humidity rises, the water content rises, and the ability of sweat to
evaporate diminishes. At later stages of heat illness, victims also lose
the ability to sweat because of severe dehydration, and of course heat
continues to build up and core temperature rises.
L. Tadeus said,
We cool trainees if they get above 102 degrees F (38.8 degrees C).
Anything above 105 degrees F (40.5 degrees C) is our threshold for a
medical emergency. Core temperatures of 107 degrees F (41.6 degrees
C) can result in death. I’m talking about ice bath—not sitting in an air-
conditioned room. Our trainees do not reenter the training pipeline
after a heat/cold injury without successfully completing a heat stress
test and being cleared by our medical staff.
Gordon Giesbrecht added, “There is evidence that you might have an
increased risk of heat illness once you have overheated. There is also evidence
that you might have an increased risk of local cold injury (i.e., frostbite or non-
freezing cold injury [NFCI] after a cold injury). There is less evidence that you
have increased risk of hypothermia, certainly not at the mild to moderate level.”

--- Page 104 Text ---
HEAT ACCLIMATIZATION
One of the ways to prevent hyperthermia is to acclimate to the heat. According
to the Navy Environmental Health Center Bureau of Medicine Health Center:
Acclimatization is a process of physiologic adaptation to heat stress
conditions. After acclimatization, a person’s tolerance of and
performance in heat stress conditions are improved.
Acclimatization is accomplished by exposure to heat stress over a
period of days or weeks. Exposure to heat for one hour or less, even
with exercise, will not accomplish the acclimatization. It is possible
only with longer daily exposures.
Heat acclimatization occurs more rapidly in persons with greater
cardiopulmonary fitness. Active women may acclimatize to heat at a
faster rate or to a greater extent than active men. Physical conditioning
is also advantageous in the body’s response to dehydration, a heat
stress–related condition. In one study, physical conditioning was
associated with enhanced work performance during dehydration.
Inactivity results in decreased acclimatization after only a few days
or weeks. Exposing heat-acclimatized individuals regularly to cold
temperatures can cause a significant loss in heat acclimatization. A
single exercise and/or heat exposure per week was no different from
complete cessation of endurance exercise in the heat with regard to
loss of acclimatization-related changes in plasma volume.
Acclimatization-related changes in sweat gland function may be
attenuated by increases in central dopaminergic activity.
I learned from Dr. Keatinge that if you’re acclimated to the cold, you won’t
acclimate well to the heat. Your body can’t do both at the same time.
Gordon Giesbrecht suggested starting early, “well before you plan to swim in
warm or hot water; gradually building up to the work and thermal stress; and
getting to know your body.” He said, “Don’t just go out and do it and try to
power through it. You’ll lose. You need to take a lot of time, and you need to
monitor your responses. Make adjustments according to how you’re feeling, and
swim with a buddy who knows you and knows when you are doing well and
when you aren’t. The more you understand this process, the more you’ll be able
to figure out what works for you and what doesn’t.”

--- Page 105 Text ---
SEAL Hyperthermia Experiences
Because the SEALs work in environments of extreme hot and cold, I asked L.
Tadeus if he’d ever experienced hyperthermia or hypothermia. He recounted his
experience with hyperthermia:
My platoon was training in the desert more than a decade ago, and
even at night the temperature was over 95 degrees F (35 degrees C).
Our objective was to practice patrolling to a location, then construct a
“spider hole,” and finally lay up in this location to observe a logistical
line of communication and report what we saw via satellite to a rear
echelon tactical operation center (TOC).
We had to dig into the sand and backfill the hole with sandbags to
stabilize the walls. We would then cover the hole with tarp and sand so
that it appeared nothing had changed. Three of us manned the position
as the sun came up, and the rest of the platoon patrolled back to base.
We were already beat, dehydrated, and pretty much angry at the
universe when the sun came up.
After we’d spent all day in the hole, the inside started to swelter, and
I and another member of the three-man element became increasingly
dehydrated. We were drinking as much as we could but were already
behind the power curve.
The senior man in the hole made the decision to call for a
MEDEVAC, and the training cadre came to our location with a van to
pick us up. We were ordered to break down our position, fill in the
hole we’d dug, and prepare to return.
My fellow victim and I had all the classic symptoms: We had both
stopped sweating. Even when we were standing in midday sun in 120
degrees F (48.8 degrees C) heat, the slightest breeze felt really cool.
As we broke down our position, we were emptying sandbags. Every
time I bent down to empty a sandbag, I would get very dizzy—it felt
like when you squat down for a while, then stand back up and get a
little light-headed, only times ten. I would need to sit down and rest for
a minute or so after each sandbag. This was, of course, due to severely
low blood pressure brought on by dehydration. We were both
extremely lethargic. It felt like time was slowing down a bit. My ears
were ringing, I was getting a little bit of tunnel vision, and I felt
dissociated from events happening around me. I can only describe the

--- Page 106 Text ---
feeling as surreal—it was like everyone’s voice around me was
echoing inside my head.
When we returned to the training compound, we were both given a
once-over by the docs. I still can’t figure out why nobody ever got our
rectal temperatures. My partner was so dehydrated that his veins had
collapsed and intravenous fluids were not an option. It took the docs
about ten minutes to find a workable vein in my arm. After about ten
sticks, they finally got a good vein. I took about five bags of fluid over
the next few hours, and my partner drank water until he could urinate,
which took a few hours. We both had a huge hangover the next
morning and flulike soreness over our entire bodies for the whole day.
I can only assume our core temps were somewhere in the 105-
degree F (41.8 degrees C) range, based on my experience with
hyperthermia as a trainer.
We recently had a trainee go down with hyperthermia. He was
participating in a four-mile timed run. As always, there is not only
pressure to pass but also to exceed their previous score. The trainee
had just returned from a two-week holiday stand-down, and this was
his first run since returning. The time standard is 4 miles (6.4
kilometers) in 31 minutes, a little less than an 8-minute mile and
definitely not a world-record pace.
This trainee was set to meet the standard but was near the back of
the pack. However, about two hundred meters from the finish line, he
collapsed. He was assessed within fifteen seconds or so by the on-
scene medical staff, then placed in the emergency vehicle and
transported to a medical facility that was nearby.
His core temperature was taken with a rectal probe and discovered
to be at 107.5 degrees F (41.9 degrees C), which is about as close to
death by overheating as you can get. He was immediately bathed in
ice, given intravenous fluids, and assessed until his core temperature
dropped below 102 degrees F (38.8 degrees C).
He exhibited many of the same symptoms. He was able to power
through the lethargy by sheer force of will and by adjusting his run
technique—he was throwing his whole body into it. He had stopped
sweating a little over halfway through the run. He remembered nothing
about the run after the two-mile turnaround point. He was very
lethargic and incoherent between the time of his collapse and his

--- Page 107 Text ---
arrival at a treatment facility.
His core temp was so high that he probably cooked a few brain
cells. It was also so high that he had to be assessed forty-five days
after the incident, using heat-stress tests to ensure that his
susceptibility to further heat injuries did not physically disqualify him
from the program.
~ Water heats the body twenty-five times faster than air at the same temperature.
~ Make sure to drink enough water while exercising in warm to hot water. Hot air can make
hyperthermia worse.
Symptoms of Heat Exhaustion
Normal to slightly elevated core temperature.
Fatigue or malaise.
Orthostatic hypotension (dizzy when standing up), tachycardia (rapid heart rate, over
100 beats per minute).
Clinical signs of dehydration.
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea.
Mental confusion.
Treatment for Heat Exhaustion
Place in a tub of cool water.
Give fluid and electrolyte replacement.
Symptoms of Heatstroke
Elevated core temperature, usually greater than 104.9 degrees F (40.5 degrees C).
Weakness, nausea, vomiting, headache.
Central nervous system symptoms, including confusion, not able to be stable on feet,
coma, seizures, delirium.
Loss of ability to sweat, resulting in hot, dry skin.
Fever.
Shivering.
Treatment for Heatstroke
Call 911.
Pour as much water as possible on the victim’s head and fan air over the victim as much
as possible (either with an electric fan or manually). Clothing will trap the water against
the skin until it evaporates and takes heat from the body. If the victim’s clothes are

--- Page 108 Text ---
removed, much of the water poured on the victim will merely roll off onto the ground
and not participate in heat loss.
If the victim is not wearing much clothing, apply the water more to the shorts and shirt
than bare areas.
Wet washcloths with cool water and place on the victim’s forehead and body.
Immerse victim in cold or ice water.

--- Page 109 Text ---
HYPOTHERMIA
Gordon Giesbrecht said that hypothermia is clinically defined when core
temperature decreases from normal to below 95 degrees F (35 degrees C). Mild
hypothermia is from 95 to 90 degrees F (35 to 32 degrees C); moderate
hypothermia is from 90 to 82 degrees F (32 to 28 degrees C); and severe
hypothermia is below 82 degrees F (below 38 degrees C). This physical
condition needs treatment when body temperature falls below 95 degrees F (35
degrees C). Hypothermia becomes life threatening when body temperature drops
below 90 degrees F (32.2 degrees C).
Any decrease in core temperature (for example, above 95 degrees F—35
degrees C—and thus not clinically hypothermic) indicates that there is some
uncompensated heat loss and that core temperature will likely continue to drop
unless something changes (such as increasing heat production/delivery and/or
decreased heat loss). The initial signs of cold stress are feeling cold and
shivering, a heat production mechanism that normally occurs to prevent
hypothermia in the first place. The “umbles” is a simple pneumonic that can be
used to remember the early stages of hypothermia (from Hypothermia, Frostbite
and other Cold Injuries by Gordon Giesbrecht and David Wilkerson, Mountain
Books, Seattle, 2006):
Fumbles: Small muscle groups get cold and fine motor control is lost.
Stumbles: Large muscle groups get cold and gross motor control is affected.
Tumbles: The victim is unable to walk or stand.
Grumbles: Early on, the victim is irritable.
Mumbles: Further cooling affects brain function and talking is difficult.
A decrease in mental function leads to impaired ability to make decisions. A
swimmer may appear tired, lethargic, disoriented, and slur words or have other
changes in speech. The person may appear drunk.
As people get older, their shivering reflex diminishes (in the moderate to
severe range), and the defense heat production mechanism is less effective.
People experiencing hypothermia may become unable to walk or stand and
eventually lose consciousness (this occurs somewhere between 90 to 86 degrees
F, or 32 to 30 degrees C).
Although there used to be a belief that warming a cold victim pre-hospital was
dangerous, there is now general agreement that moderate warming of a patient in
the field or during pre-hospital transport (anything short of putting the patient in

--- Page 110 Text ---
a warm bath or shower) is beneficial and safe. The main priorities of treatment
are to remove the victim from the cold stress; halt the decrease in core
temperature; maintain cardiovascular stability; and support steady, safe core
rewarming, as indicated by the Alaska State Guidelines for Treatment of
Hypothermia, Frostbite, and other Cold Injury. The concern was that pre-hospital
warming would cause massive vasodilation, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
However, the only way that can happen is if a victim is placed in a tub of
warm/hot water or in a warm/hot shower. Thus, a victim should never be placed
in a tub of warm or hot water. Any other type of warming available to pre-
hospital personnel is safe. These treatments include: chemical, electric, or
charcoal heat packs; warm water bottles (rigid or flexible); skin-to-skin body-to-
body contact; warm water–perfused or electric blankets.
A victim should be gently removed from danger and then moved to a sheltered
area, keeping the victim as horizontal as possible. Rough handling can induce
ventricular fibrillation, and vertical position can cause decreased blood pressure
(due to blood pooling in the legs) and increased after-drop in core temperature
(as blood flows to the cold limbs and returns to the heart). Any wet clothing
should be removed (by cutting it off) and the victim dried by blotting, not
rubbing, and then placed in as much insulation as possible.
A mildly hypothermic patient will be conscious and shivering vigorously. This
shivering will eventually warm the core, so external heat is not necessary.
However, external heat does attenuate shivering, and thus the work of the heart,
providing more comfort. A moderately to severely hypothermic patient—who
will have weak or no shivering and diminished or no consciousness—should be
actively warmed by whatever means is available (except any form of water bath
or shower). Once the patient is in a stable enclosure, transfer to hospital should
ensue immediately.
SEAL Hypothermia Experiences
L. Tadeus recounted his experience of hypothermia and the experiences of some
SEAL trainees:
My platoon was conducting cold-water dive training in the Pacific
Northwest. The water temperature was about 45 to 50 degrees F (7.2
degrees to 10 degrees C). We were training in dry suits and semi-dry
suits. By semi-dry, I mean a wet suit that traps a single layer of water,
which the body warms with minimal follow on circulation through the
suit. You have probably seen triathlon wet suits that have a slick

--- Page 111 Text ---
(versus normal) neoprene surface. A semi-dry wet suit has a similar
interior that extends all the way to the wrist, ankle, and neck seals. The
advantage is that one layer of water gets into the wet suit or is put
there via a hot shower, where it remains. It differs from normal wet
suits in that water does not readily circulate through or seep into the
suit. Really good ones, like mine, are impregnated with a titanium
powder that enhances their insulative properties.
We were conducting very long dives near the limits of the U.S.
Navy dive tables. On one dive, after several hours underwater, I
approached the hypothermic boundary. I had stopped shivering.
[Gordon Giesbrecht noted that when L. Tadeus stopped shivering, he
was well past the threshold of mild hypothermia.] At one point during
the dive, I actually felt warm, even though my core body temperature
was still dropping. Fortunately, the dive ended soon after. When I
exited the water, I was very dizzy, suffering from a condition called
caloric vertigo—my inner ear on one side was colder than the other,
which threw off my balance—so I could barely walk. This appeared to
be a neurological deficit consistent with arterial gas embolism (AGE).
I was also very lethargic and a little incoherent.
An arterial gas embolism (AGE) can occur during scuba diving.
Sometimes simply called gas embolism, it is an obstruction of blood
flow caused by gas bubbles (emboli) entering the arterial circulation.
Obstruction of the arteries of the brain and heart can lead to death if
not promptly relieved. In lay terms: The blood has dissolved gases in
it. Dissolved gas can expand and form bubbles with changes in
pressure. If those gas bubbles restrict blood flow, especially to the
brain, neurological deficits might emerge, such as loss of balance,
slurred speech, unilateral coordination, or strength changes.
Diagnosis is difficult, because there are so many things that can
cause deficits. For example, if a diver has a balance problem after a
dive, it could be because he has caloric vertigo, or he could have AGE
(one part of his brain isn’t getting oxygen). Determining exactly what
is causing the issue can be the difference between a six-hour ride in a
small recompression chamber or simple rewarming—ultimately
between life and death.
With hypothermia, lethargy and slurred speech are possible. These
symptoms are also consistent with AGE. Again, AGE would need to
be ruled out.

--- Page 112 Text ---
It took a very long time to rule out a diving-related illness. I didn’t
have to take a six-hour ride in a recompression chamber, but I was
taking neurological exams when what I really wanted to do was sit in a
hot tub or curl up in the fetal position and stick my thumb in my mouth
in a nice hot shower.
Again, I do not know what my core temp was. I can only speculate
that it approached 87 degrees F (30.5 degrees C). But I wasn’t any
more interested in having my temperature checked rectally than the
on-scene doc was in taking my temperature that way. [Gordon
Giesbrecht added, “This is precisely why we tell people to measure
esophageal temperature. It is easier and thus more likely to be done
and more accurate.”]
There were distinct portions of the dive I could not recall afterward
—I had blank spots in my memory. I do recall feeling very euphoric at
the same time I experienced feeling warm. In fact, I recall thinking,
Uh-oh, I must be hypothermic … cool! I also remember feeling that it
was do-or-die, which actually wasn’t true. The point is, I was still
consciously weighing the length of the rest of the dive against my
current perceived condition. In the end, I opted to keep my mouth shut
because I was sure the cadre would save me if I got too bad. My
symptoms were so apparent to everyone after the dive that the docs
had to respond.
The next day, I did not feel hungover. But I remember having a
really empty sort of feeling all over. That’s the best I can describe it. It
took a day or two before that feeling went away.
Hypothermia is something some SEAL trainees experience, especially in the
colder months of the year. It usually occurs in Hell Week and during training
dives. The instructors recently had a trainee go down right before a chow break
early in Hell Week. He was hypoglycemic and cold. It’s a bad combination when
a person is cold, wet, dehydrated, hasn’t slept, and hasn’t stopped moving in a
couple of days. Rest, hydration, and nutrition are extremely important to high-
performance athletes. The trainee’s blood oxygen saturation was between 85 and
90 percent. This was a further indicator that he was pretty far gone. His core
temp was around 89 degrees F. Below 87 degrees F, most people don’t recover.
The trainee was lethargic and incoherent; he stopped shivering and collapsed
face-first on the beach. There is a limit to how long a trainee can spend away
from his class before he is unable to return. The length of time required for

--- Page 113 Text ---
rewarming and feeding this trainee exceeded that limit—trainees cannot return to
training until their vital signs are within a certain range.
Trainees exert themselves so much that the instructors have to practically
force-feed them all week. The trainees struggle to keep enough calories in them
to keep them going. If they don’t, hypoglycemia kicks in, and it’s only a matter
of time before even slight dehydration takes hold.
When this occurs, a lack of circulating fluids means that there is minimal heat
generation and minimal heat transfer. The trainee usually spirals downward
pretty quickly, but this situation is normal, and on-scene physicians know to deal
with it immediately. On rare occasions, a trainee will force himself to power
through, and then he does a face-plant.
Years ago, Dr. William Keatinge developed a “thermopill” used by astronauts
to measure their core temperatures in space. During my Bering Strait swim, Dr.
Keatinge and Dr. Jan Nyboer had me swallow a large metal thermopill so they
could monitor my core temperature during the swim in 38-degree F (3.3-degree
C) waters. The thermopill transmitted a signal to a receiver on board the escort
boat. Unfortunately, the signal dissipated in the salt water; the doctors asked me
to roll over on my back so they could hold the receiver near my stomach to get a
temperature reading. This was all experimental, and the doctors couldn’t obtain
good readings, but over the years, the thermopill has been refined. A core temp
“pill” is read by an external device to get a core temp periodically without doing
anything invasive. The pills are expensive and slightly inaccurate, but well-
funded athletes can use it to tell if they need to get warmer/cooler midevent or
give support personnel an indication that it is time to stop training and get some
medical attention.
Individual Factors
There are individual factors that contribute to a person’s ability to acclimate to
the cold. Rick Knepper has observed the following:
~ Body fat level is a major factor in preventing hypothermia in the water; however, activity level
(the ability to generate heat) is a trade-off dependent on the circumstances. People may react
differently to how quickly blood will shut off from the extremities when activity is reduced or
stopped.
~ Some swimmers are purists, while others are not. SEAL trainees wear wet suits. If you are going
to wear one to prevent hypothermia, Rick explained that you should know how much rubber is in
your full or partial wet suit, and swim in it enough times to ensure that you don’t get raw spots from
rubbing.
~ Seasickness with vomiting can cause a loss of heat from the core and increase the risk of
hypothermia.

--- Page 114 Text ---
~ Many first-time hypothermia and hyperthermia incidents probably never would have happened
with some sort of evaluation and preparation before a swim.
~ Rick has seen many people recover from both heat exhaustion (not heatstroke) and hypothermia
incidents and continue in subsequent training and operations without further incidents. It seems that
people become more aware of their capabilities and limitations and make adjustments either to their
exposure or their preparation.
~ Many swimmers do not hydrate enough in either hot or cold water, which can lead to problems.
Monitor how often you urinate throughout long events.
~ Swimmers who have had a hypothermic incident have been known to increase their body fat and
perform well in succeeding events.
~ Whether or not swimmers have had a reaction to heat or cold, they should by all means be very
measured in their goals and put controls in place to mitigate and handle any occurrences.
Environmental Factors
Rick pointed out some considerations to make your swims safer:
~ Hot or cold weather conditions may strongly determine if hyperthermia or hypothermia may
occur. However, I have seen many cases of hyperthermia that occurred on very cool and overcast
days, and cases of hypothermia that occurred on warm, sunny days. Be prepared to recognize both
conditions.
~ Weather can change, sometimes significantly. The athlete must be mentally ready to adjust and
should have a go and no-go cutoff when temperature or conditions exceed the established thresholds.
~ Paddlers and support crews are vulnerable to heat and cold injuries as well; they need to be
ready and dressed accordingly.
~ The sun can be a tremendous factor in heat and sunburn for both swimmer and paddlers. You
need to acclimate, get some sun conditioning, and use sun block in ample amounts.
Many swimmers will time their event for the night hours to get calmer water
and avoid the sun; this can apply to training swims but does create some safety
and support issues when lifeguards are not on duty. Here’s another time when a
support team of paddlers can provide that safety net.

--- Page 115 Text ---
ICE SWIMMING
For years, people in Russia, Finland, Norway, Denmark, and Sweden have taken
saunas, and afterward jumped into ice-cold lakes or rivers and swum for a few
meters to invigorate their bodies, and enjoyed the fun. Swimmers around the
world participate in these icy dips. On Christmas Day in Dingle, Ireland, Nuala
Moore and her lifeguard and open water swimming friends organize a Christmas
Day swim for the community. Crowds of people run and shout and jump into the
cold water and swim for a few meters as people watch from shore and laugh and
encourage them. After the plunge, the swimmers join their friends and warm
themselves beside fires and eat bowls of hot soup and mince pies and drink
mulled cider, or hot whiskey.
There are communities in the United States and around the world that have
annual Polar Bear swims, when people jump into the ocean on New Year’s Day
to welcome the New Year. It’s a great celebration and a lot of fun for the
participants and spectators. People are usually aware that they need to get warm
immediately after their dip.
There is a new fad emerging in open water swimming described as “ice
swimming.” Groups of swimmers swim over four hundred meters in water
temperatures below 41 degrees F (5 degrees C). They have been encouraging
other swimmers to join in.
Recently, three friends who swam the Catalina Channel and are strong
swimmers decided to try a mile swim in 41-degree F (5-degree C) water across
Lake Arrowhead. Although they’d been training in the ocean, they had not
acclimated to the water temperature or to the altitude. One friend said that she
jumped into the water and felt pins and needles and, after ten minutes, was very
cold. She experienced mild hypothermia, her swimming companion got out after
fifteen minutes with moderate hypothermia, and the third swimmer was pulled
out after twenty minutes, taken to the emergency room with severe hypothermia,
and spent a day in the hospital.
Ice swimming can be dangerous even if a swim is only four hundred meters. It
should never been done as a lark. It has taken me over thirty years to swim in
very cold water, and when I do a very cold swim, I spend a great deal of time
acclimating and have lifeguard and medical support alongside me on my swim.

--- Page 116 Text ---
AFTER-DROP
After most cool-or cold-water swims, swimmers will have an after-drop,
meaning that once they’re out of the water, increased blood flow to the colder
limbs cools the blood, which then returns to cool the heart further. Most
swimmers will feel chilled after a cold swim, and some will shiver; this is often a
result of after-drop and a colder brain temperature. Though shivering is the
body’s protective mechanism to create heat, and it helps the body rewarm, most
swimmers do not enjoy the after-drop or the intense shivering.
After my two-hour-and-six-minute swim across the Bering Strait in water
temperatures that ranged from 38 to 42 degrees F (3.3 to 5.5 degrees C), I
experienced after-drop. The Russian physician, Dr. Rita Zacharova, was
extremely well versed in treatment for hypothermia. She prepared a rewarming
tent, a shelter that was far warmer than the icy Siberian beach on Big Diomede
Island.
Dr. Zacharova had me remove my wet swimsuit, dry off, and climb into a
sleeping bag. She placed a hot-water bottle on my forearm to make sure it wasn’t
too hot, and then she applied bottles on either side of my neck, under each arm,
and in my groin. The heat from the bottles warmed the blood in large arteries
near the skin surface; this warmed blood circulated through my body and
warmed my core effectively; and I shivered moderately, which was my body’s
way of generating heat. Within an hour, my core temperature had risen to 102
degrees F (38.8 degrees C), well above my normal 97.6 F (36.4 degrees C).
After-drop is not something any swimmer wants to undergo. I’ve learned from
experience and from the United States Air Force, which conducts cold survival
training in Greenland and Antarctica, to put on warm, dry clothes after a swim,
get into a warm environment, drink warm fluids, eat food for rewarming, and
(only if you know that you are not significantly hypothermic) keep moving to
generate heat. If my skin is very cold, what works for me is to take a cool
shower and gradually increase the water temperature until it is hot, then put on
warm clothes and drink warm fluids and eat something to give my body fuel.

--- Page 117 Text ---
Sinuses and Ears
For years, I taught children and adults how to swim. Often parents told me they
were concerned that their children would develop ear or sinus infections. Once
that occurred, the children seemed to be more susceptible to other infections.
Last summer, a friend traveled with his young family to Finland for vacation.
His son swam in a beautiful clear freshwater lake. A few days after the swim, the
son developed an ear infection. When the Finnish doctor looked at his ears, he
said, “In all the years I’ve treated patients, I’ve never seen a child with algae
growing out of his ears.” The doctor treated the infection and the child was fine,
but his father told me that his son always gets ear infections now. Earplugs might
have helped.

--- OCR from Page 117 Image 1 ---
Chapter 8

a

--- Page 118 Text ---
PREVENTION OF INFECTIONS
Some swimmers use a type of silicone earplug that shapes itself to ears like wax
or putty, prevents most water from getting into the ear canal, and helps to
prevent ear infections. Other swimmers use plastic earplugs—make sure they fit
snugly in your ears. Most of the swimsuit manufacturers and swim and surf
shops carry a variety of earplugs.
The only problem with earplugs is that when you put them in your ears, you
reduce your ability to hear what’s going on around you. You might not hear an
approaching boater, Jet Skier, or kite surfer. When I needed to wear earplugs, I
made sure to be even more observant while I was swimming to compensate for
not being to hear as well. When I swam in Antarctica, I was not sure how the 32-
degree temperature would affect my ears and whether exposure would injure my
ears. I tried using plastic earplugs, but they were uncomfortable. When I was
visiting William Poe, my dentist, I mentioned that I was trying to find a way to
protect my ears. He said that his son was always getting ear infections, so he
custom-made a pair for him using dental material. He offered to do the same for
me. He squeezed the dental material in my ears and let the material form to my
ear canals. When he removed them, he labeled them “right” and “left” so I
would be able to tell them apart.
They kept my ear canals completely dry and, unlike some hard plastic
earplugs, did not irritate the ear canals when I pulled them out. The earplugs
reduced my hearing somewhat, but my support boats were all within twenty feet
of me, and I could hear the crew clearly.
The SEALs spend a lot of time conducting dive training, and it is critical for
them to have clear sinuses and ears so they don’t rupture their eardrums or get a
blocked sinus. They have figured out that the causes of the sinus and ear
infections determine how they treat the infections. For example, if a person has
adult-onset allergies and routinely has sinus infections, there are preventative
meds, such as Allegra and nose sprays, that keep the infections at bay. Some
SEALs deal with infections as they happen. They have also found that if a
person is otherwise healthy, simple hygiene should do the trick. Q-tips do
wonders for the ears. The SEALs have seen many trainees get “squeezes” (the
inability to equalize pressure between two air spaces) due to dirty ears. A
squeeze can happen in the inner ears (and can result in perforation of the
tympanic membrane—a “perf,” as they call it).

--- Page 119 Text ---
A perf can happen while ascending (a reverse squeeze) or descending. This is
much more problematic when the trainee needs to get to the surface. If it
happens going down, they can always stop and go back up. Stopping to go back
down isn’t always an option, especially when they don’t have enough air.
To keep the sinuses free of muck, a squirt of saline solution in the nose will work
(saline doesn’t burn too much). The SEALs avoid Afrin because the body builds
a tolerance to it. Eventually, the sinuses cannot do their job without the Afrin.

--- Page 120 Text ---
Ocean Hazards

--- OCR from Page 120 Image 1 ---
Chapter 9
a

--- Page 121 Text ---
FOG
Swimming in fog can be very risky. It is possible to get lost right offshore and
out in the middle of the channel. Years ago, Jim Murray, an amazing sportswriter
for the Los Angeles Times, recounted his story about swimming off the shore of
Boston with his brother. They were preteens and had decided to go for a swim.
Jim was nearsighted and didn’t have goggles with corrective lenses. They were
swimming just offshore when the fog swept in. Jim lost sight of his brother. He
shouted his name but heard nothing. Jim started to get scared. The fog was
swirling around him and closing in.
He wanted to swim to shore, but he couldn’t tell which way to go. He tried
turning around and swimming toward where he thought the shore would be, but
after swimming for some time, he didn’t find shore. He tried swimming in
another direction and shouted his brother’s name again, but all he heard was the
loud moan of the foghorn. He was cold and getting colder and could feel the fear
in him rising to panic. He wondered if he was going to die. He talked himself
into swimming again. He tried moving in a different direction, and suddenly, a
white buoy loomed in front of him. He found a chain and clung to it for hours
and felt the cold moving into his body and chilling him to the bone.
When the fog finally lifted, he swam in to shore and found his brother, who
had been lost in the fog onshore, about a half mile down the beach from where
they had left their towels. It took Jim hours to warm up, and he never quite got
over the experience.

--- Page 122 Text ---
Even though I had an experienced crew, I got lost at night in the middle of the
Catalina Channel. These are the things I do to avoid being lost in the fog:
~ Don’t get in the water if the fog is moving in.
~ Wear a GPS or compass wristwatch and know how to use it.
~ Swim just outside the wave break so that if the fog moves in, you can hear the surf and turn in to
shore.
~ Wear a bright-colored swim cap.
~ If possible, swim beside support vessels with good illumination.
I asked L. Tadeus what the SEALs do if they get caught in the fog and how
they implement safety measures to prevent being lost. He said, “If we are
conducting a training swim with trainees and I have doubts about my ability to
keep them safe, we reschedule the swim. If I am swimming and fog rolls in, I
always have an analog compass on my watch. Some watches have a compass
function built in. By knowing the long shore bearing, I can simply swim at
ninety degrees to it and find my way back to shore—mission planning [discussed
in Chapter 12]. If I am near surf, I just listen for it and swim to it. GPS is an
awesome tool, but electronics and seawater have a long history of not working
well together. Usually, GPS fails right when you need it. We have a mantra in the
SEAL teams: “Two is one, one is none.” Always have a redundant method for
everything, including navigation. The goal is to carefully think it through—time-
critical risk management.”
SHIPS, BOATS, JET SKIS, SAILOR BOATS, WINDSURFERS, KITE
SURFERS, AND SURFERS
Never assume that people operating watercrafts see you. You must always be
watching and aware and make sure you get out of their way. Many people who
are operating watercrafts are not looking for swimmers, or they are distracted.
Recently, a friend contacted me to say that she’d heard about a new device
that a swimmer could wear to listen to music. She wanted to know if the sounds
emitted by the device might attract sharks. My response was: Don’t worry about
the sharks; worry about the boaters, windsurfers, and anyone else on the water. If
you are listening to music, you may not be able to hear the engine sounds of a
small boat and most will not hear a windsurfer sailing by. It would be bad to get
a skeg in the head. My friend said that she was planning to swim in an area that
was designated for swimmers with buoys, and I said that while boaters are told
they cannot operate in swimming areas, they sometimes stray, and if you are

--- Page 123 Text ---
wearing headphones, you may not hear the boater.
If you want to wear a headset and listen to music, do it in a swimming pool.
Most people who are swimming in the open water want to hear what’s
happening around them and enjoy being out there.

--- OCR from Page 124 Image 1 ---
PART TWO

Beginning and
Intermediate
Swimmers

--- Page 125 Text ---
Training Swims
Training swims are just that—they give you the chance to test your ability,
monitor your improvement, try different foods and liquids before big swims and
competitions. Training swims will help you find what works best for you and
how frequently you need to feed and in what sequence to eat and drink. They
give you the opportunity to test yourself before big swims or competitions.
Whether short or long, these swims need to be planned in detail like a mission.
L. Tadeus noted that mission planning and progressive training plans are
equally important. He said, “Besides mission planning, probably the most
important risk-management tool we use is a progressive training plan.
Obviously, you do not jump into the water and knock out a ten-mile swim on
your first day. You build intensity, whether that is through added duration, added
distance, added speed, or added environmental challenges.”
In open water training sessions, pool swimmers and triathletes work on pace,
speed, intensity, endurance, and stroke just like they would in the swimming
pool. In the open water, you will need to be able to sprint and have endurance.
The sprinting ability helps you move through currents and tidal changes, and the
endurance training enables you to swim long distances without having to rest.
When I transitioned from the swimming pool to the ocean, Ron Blackledge,
the Seal Beach swim coach who let me train with his team, applied workouts
from the swimming pool in the ocean. He had us work on pace, speed, intensity,
endurance, and stroke. In the swimming pool, we would swim ten times one
hundred yards freestyle on a pace of one minute and thirty seconds. We would
descend each one hundred, or swim each one faster than the previous swim. In
the ocean, we would swim ten miles (sixteen kilometers), each mile on a twenty-
one-minute interval and faster than the previous mile.
If I hadn’t trained for three years with Don Gambril, the four-time Olympic

--- OCR from Page 125 Image 1 ---
Chapter 10
a

--- Page 126 Text ---
swimming coach, and Ben Muritt, the Harvard University swim coach, for four
years during summer vacation, and club coaches in the winter, I would not have
been able to jump into the ocean and swim with the Seal Beach team. Even
though I had a great basis, in my first week, Coach Blackledge had me swim half
to three-quarters the distance, because ocean swimming requires far more energy
than pool swimming, and he wanted me to succeed and be able to build on my
success. If I’d been unable to complete the workout, I might have been
discouraged, and it would have taken more energy and focus to overcome that.
Once Coach Blackledge saw that I could complete the workouts and I wasn’t
getting overly tired or injured, he allowed me to swim the entire workout. When
I decided to swim across the English Channel, Coach Gambril agreed to coach
me and increased the intensity and varied the distances. I swam hard through the
workouts, and I got stronger, but I also took time to recover so I could build on
what I was doing, swim longer with more intensity, and get even stronger.
The SEALs carefully plan their workouts like missions, even if they are
swimming only a mile or two. Make sure that every time you go into the water,
you plan, mitigate risk, swim where there are lifeguards, and swim with a buddy
or buddies.

--- Page 127 Text ---
TRAINING SAFELY
One of the key concepts Rick Knepper has learned during his years as an
instructor and swimmer is that even the best swimmers in the world can have
serious problems during routine workouts. Based on these experiences, he
recommends:
~ Swim with a swimming buddy who knows your capabilities and can identify if something is
going wrong.
~ If you run into trouble in the open water before lifeguards come on duty, get the attention of
people onshore and have them call 911 for help. Be relentless. Continue to shout and signal for help
until it is rendered.
~ Know what you are capable of doing and how much help you can render.
From years of experience, Rick has seen all sorts of swimmers, all levels of
accomplishment, and various factors that set people up for problems. These are
things he thinks you need to keep in mind when you’re swimming in the open
water:
~ The person in trouble is usually the last one to recognize that anything is wrong.
~ Experience in various conditions gives a positive edge but does not guarantee anything.
~ Each season and workout are different; people get older, fitness levels change with life, and
constant reassessment of goals and milestones is necessary, even within the season.
~ People are at risk when attempting an event distance in conditions that are too far beyond what
they have previously done; swimmers need to expand or extend personal capabilities in a measured
way to be aware of their current limits and abilities.
~ Acclimation is a huge factor. You need to get into the water enough times to adapt to the
conditions; the mind acclimates as well as the body.
~ When you are training in very cold or hot water, take some recovery time to prevent
overtraining.
~ Mental conditioning is important: You need to work on goal segmenting, arousal control,
visualization, and positive self-talk.
~ Symptoms of hypothermia and hyperthermia may vary among people. Some swimmers may
naturally slow down during a swim; others, however, may experience a sharp breakdown in stroke
count, a sign that something is wrong.
~ Athletes, especially the serious ones, are mentally tough and will push through extreme zones. A
team leader needs to know the swimmer and make the right call on whether to stop or encourage the
swimmer.
~ People have different tolerances to heat and cold dependent upon many genetic and fitness
factors. Rick has seen people shivering uncontrollably and mentally out of it with a core temperature
of 96 degrees F (35.5 degrees C), while other swimmers with core temperatures between 88 and 92
degrees F (31.1 and 33.3 degrees C) are talking normally and shaking moderately despite being in
serious danger.
~ Athletes can bring on a problem before an event, such as through improper training. It’s better to

--- Page 128 Text ---
be under-trained and rested than to be overtrained and tired.
~ One of the worst things you can do as a swimmer is to try a new food or fluid before a swim.
The food or fluid might make you sick and cause you to abort the swim. Stick to your feeding plans.
Swim like you trained.
~ Improper taper: Make sure to reduce your training gradually, and get enough rest before your big
swim.
TRAINING FOR A SHORT OPEN WATER SWIM
The most important things when you start swimming in the open water are:
Identify your current swimming level, figure out what your goals are, and draft a
progressive training plan that will help you reach your goal. Will you be training
for a short, medium, or long triathlon or open water swim? Can you set goals
that will help you gradually build strength, speed, and endurance? Figuring out
your swimming level, goals, and plan to achieve your goals is easier if you have
a coach who can give you feedback and guidance.
I’m defining a short swim as between one mile (1.6 kilometers) and three
miles (4.8 kilometers), because there are many age groups, triathletes, and
masters swimmers who routinely complete these distances during pool workouts.
A medium distance suitable for intermediate and advanced swimmers would be
four to ten miles (6.4 to 16 kilometers), and a long distance for advanced
swimmers would be anything over ten miles (16 kilometers).
When you are considering the length of the swim, remember that you most
likely will not swim a straight line from one point to another, and the distance
will be a little or perhaps a lot longer than what was defined. You need to
consider the environmental factors that will influence the distance of your swim.
When you are entering the open water, you may experience a sense of
excitement at being in water that is alive and filled with life. You may feel a
sense of freedom that you no longer have to swim back and forth in a lane, and
flip-turn off cement walls, and follow a black line on the bottom of the pool. You
may enjoy breathing fresh air and love being able to swim from one place to
another.
There are some swimmers, runners, and triathletes who feel overwhelmed
when they get in the water. The open water seems ominous. They are afraid.
They can’t hang on pool walls and lane lines. They can’t see the bottom and
can’t follow the black line to help them stay on course. They have to allow
themselves time to become comfortable in the water. They need to swim with a
confident and helpful swimming buddy.
Your first open water swims should be brief—between ten to twenty minutes

--- Page 129 Text ---
long and a distance of a half mile. If you have difficulty telling the distance in
the open water, figure out how many strokes it takes you to swim one hundred
yards in a pool and use the stroke count to estimate the distance you are
swimming in the open water.
Gradually get into the water with your swimming buddy, and enjoy the new
sensations of being in the open water. Talk about what you are seeing, feeling,
experiencing. It should be a lot of fun. A lot of swimmers and triathletes use this
time to crack jokes, review the way they plan to swim, and relish the feeling of
leaving land and entering the water and being lifted off their feet.
Try swimming alongside the buoy to help you swim in a straight line. When
you breathe, look around at the water, the waves, and the people walking
alongshore. Listen to what’s going on around you.
Take your time to stretch out your arms and slip into your pace. If you are
swimming in the ocean, notice how much more buoyant you are in the salt water,
and if you are swimming in fresh water, feel the water’s effervescence. You may
notice that the salt water feels denser than pool water, and fresh water tastes
sweeter. You may notice on a summer’s day how the sun warms the trees, grass,
and flowers, and how you can detect the direction of the wind by the scent in the
air, long before you see ripples on the water.
As you become more familiar with your new “pool,” you will see more of
what’s happening around you. You may notice the changing sky and sea. You
may see small black water bugs with their legs splayed, skimming the surface of
a lake. You may have sunfish pop from below and nibble on your toes. You may
find yourself drawn into the magic of exploration, punctuated with moments of
discovery. Savor these experiences with friends after your swims are completed.
In your next workout, add two to five minutes or one hundred to two hundred
meters. Take time to feel the water and the way the currents push and pull you.
You may have to work harder to get through a current, or you may swim across a
glassy sea that is calmer than the swimming pool.
People have different training backgrounds, schedules, and time that they can
dedicate to open water swimming. Training is most effective if you work out
daily and gradually add time and distance to your swims. By training daily, you
will become stronger, more relaxed in the water, able to acclimate to the water
temperatures, and make steady progress.
Add time and distance to your swims in five-to ten-minute increments. If you
are not able to get into the open water daily, your conditioning may take longer
than that of someone who works out every day in the open water. Whether you
are able to train every day or only a couple of times a week, the key to

--- Page 130 Text ---
swimming a mile or more is to spend time in the water, adding distance
incrementally so you build strength and remain injury free.
Continue adding time and distance to swims until you reach your mile goal. If
you need to take shorter swims because of fatigue or limited time, do it. Give
yourself time to recover. Everyone conditions differently. Your goal is to swim a
mile comfortably. Take time to watch the clouds or a dragonfly and sip water.
If you’re training for a mile swim or a two-or three-mile swim, the distance
you’ll swim will be farther, so you may want to add at least half a mile (one-
eighth of a kilometer) to your training distance to compensate for the current. It
is always better to be overprepared than underprepared. Once you reach the mile
goal, you can start working on your speed, which is as important as distance.
You need to be able to pick up your pace and sprint to get through currents.
Currents can play a huge role in a swim, and if you cannot sprint when you need
to, you may not be able to complete your race.
You can work on developing your speed by swimming faster with your buddy.
Sprint for two hundred strokes or two hundred yards (182.9 meters), then swim
one hundred yards (91.4 meters) at a moderate pace. Alternate this pace and
speed work for the entire mile; or you can warm up in the first half mile,
stretching out and working on your stroke, then alternate between sprint and
pace on the second half mile. The key is to sprint and give yourself time to
recover. Be creative with your workouts. If you’re swimming a mile, you can
break down the distance into quarter miles (four hundred meters) and swim each
quarter mile faster than the last so that your body learns how to become stronger
as you work longer.
You can also break the mile down into one-hundred-stroke sections. Swim one
hundred strokes fast; one hundred strokes moderate; and one hundred strokes in
which you focus on your stroke. Then build back up to swimming one hundred
strokes moderately and then one hundred strokes fast. The more you train, the
more you familiarize yourself with the open water, the more comfortable you’ll
be, and the more able you’ll be to focus on your swimming, enjoy the open
water, and see yourself progress. There are triathletes who are in incredible
shape for running and cycling, but they are concerned about their open water
swims. I often hear triathletes say, “If I can just get through the swimming, I’ll
be okay.” Most triathletes work hard to prepare for the swimming and do great,
but some look at the swimming as a relatively short distance and don’t take the
time to prepare. This is unfortunate, because swimming can be more dangerous
than riding a bike or running. If a triathlete gets tired when riding a bike or
running, he or she can stop, but in the open water, there is no place to rest. The

--- Page 131 Text ---
more prepared they are for the open water swimming, the more relaxed they will
be, and then they’ll be able to use their energy for the next two parts of the race.
Once you have completed your one-mile distance and feel comfortable in the
water, you can gradually increase your distances and continue to work on pace,
speed, stroke, and navigation.
Some Ideas for a Three-Mile (4.8-Kilometer) Swim
WORKOUT 1
1. Swim freestyle. Break the three miles (4.8 kilometers) into six half-mile swims (or six 0.8-kilometer
swims). Swim a half mile at pace and a half mile at a sprint.
2. Swim another half mile at a slightly faster pace and the second half mile faster than your first sprint.
3. Swim the third mile pace faster than your second, and sprint the last half mile faster than your
previous sprint.
4. Give yourself thirty seconds to a minute rest between each mile (1.6-kilometer) swim. Get your
times during your workouts, record them, and monitor your progress.
WORKOUT 2
1. Break the three miles (4.8 kilometers) into one-mile (1.6-kilometer) segments. Warm up by
swimming the first mile freestyle at pace.
2. Break the second mile into four one-hundred-meter segments. Swim each four hundred meters faster
than the previous four hundred.
3. For the last mile, swim two hundred strokes at pace, two hundred sprint, three hundred pace, three
hundred sprint, four hundred pace, four hundred sprint, three hundred pace, three hundred sprint, two
hundred pace, two hundred sprint, one hundred pace, one hundred sprint. Continue through this drill
until you complete the third mile.
Swimming head-up in the open water can become a bad habit, but it is
important that you can see what’s going on around you, navigate, and be more
visible if watercrafts stray into your swimming area.
Because swimming head-up puts more stress on your shoulders, be sure that
you warm up with your normal freestyle stroke for a half mile (0.8 kilometers),
then alternate the next half mile between swimming head-up for one hundred
strokes and head-down for four hundred. Break the second mile (1.6 kilometers)
into two half-mile swims. In the first half mile, alternate between two hundred
strokes butterfly and backstroke; in the second half mile, alternate between two
hundred strokes breaststroke and freestyle. For the last mile, swim the first half
mile freestyle and concentrate on your stroke. Focus on your catch, pull, and
recovery. For the last half mile, swim freestyle, and build your speed from

--- Page 132 Text ---
moderate to fast. Finish with a sprint. Usually, by the end of an open water or
triathlon race, the wind or current has picked up, and if you have trained to swim
stronger at the end of your workout, you can replicate it at the end of your race.
It would be unfair for me to write a series of workouts and tell you that if you
follow this manual, you will reach your goals. Reading a book will help you
prepare and give you a sense of what to do, but you cannot become an open
water swimmer or triathlete by reading a manual, just like you can’t become a
SEAL by reading a manual. You have to put in the time, distance, and training to
reach your goals.
Last year, a friend of mine signed up for her first short triathlon. The distance
of her swim was four hundred meters in a fifty-meter pool. She hadn’t swum
four hundred meters before, but she thought that if she signed up for the
triathlon, it would give her the motivation to learn. She had surfed before but did
not know how to swim and breathe correctly. She contacted me and asked if I’d
help her. After five lessons, she had the basics and said she would work out, but
she dreaded it and did not do much training. I went to watch her at the triathlon.
She had to hang on to the lane lines and the wall to catch her breath, and she
barely made the four hundred meters, but she was really proud of herself. She
said she intended to do more triathlons, and I said they would be a lot easier if
she put in more time in the water.
Recently, during a workout at the gym, she told me she had signed up for a
triathlon and would be swimming a mile in a lake. I asked if she had been
swimming, and she said, “Yes, a little,” and I asked if she was swimming more
than when she’d trained for the four hundred meters in the pool. She said no. I
couldn’t believe that she was planning to swim four times the distance of her
first swim without any real training. I was concerned that she might not make it.
Her response was if she ran into trouble, there were people on kayaks who could
help her. I just couldn’t understand this mentality. She was doing less than
minimal to prepare. Not only did that set her up for failure, it was also
dangerous. In a triathlon, during the run, you can walk; during the cycling, you
can slow down; but during the swimming, you have to be strong, especially
when you are with a lot of other swimmers who are heading for the same buoy
and there is a high possibility of unintentionally knocking into another swimmer
or being swum over. Although there is kayak and boat support, there are so many
swimmers in the water that the support people may not immediately see you. It
is not wise to be unprepared for open water swims.
Raylene Movius, a friend who competes in outrigger canoe and dragon boat
races and is a world champion in both, says that “we train like we race, and we
race like we train.” It is the same with open water swimming, and you will

--- Page 133 Text ---
discover that as you get better, you’ll enjoy being out in the open water more,
feeling the natural rhythms of the water and wind, and listening to the calls of
seabirds or laughter of friends.
TRAINING FOR A MODERATE OR LONG OPEN WATER SWIM
When you are training for a moderate or long open water swim, your time
commitment is considerably longer. You will experience more current and tidal
changes and weather than you would on a short swim. It is fun to see what you
are capable of achieving. For many open water swimmers and triathletes, the
open water swims become meditative, a chance to think about challenges in their
lives and to find solutions. During college, I spent a lot of time memorizing
information or thinking about history or English papers I would write when I
climbed out of the ocean.
The key to swimming the moderate and long swims is to continue to build
progressively on your training and to add in rest and recovery time and work
with a coach.
When I started open water swimming, I was training between five and ten
miles (eight and sixteen kilometers) per day for the San Pedro Channel
(Catalina) and the English Channel. My workouts were between two to four
hours a day, and they varied in distance and intensity each day. For a while,
Dave, my older brother, coached me and swam with me, since he was training
for the English Channel while I was training to swim the Catalina Channel. We
varied our workout sites so that we could experience different conditions.
When we swam off Long Beach, California, we usually swam from the Long
Beach pier to the jetty near 62nd Place and back. The distance was five miles
(eight kilometers), and we always encountered strong currents as we neared
62nd Place. Sometimes we did two trips and covered ten miles (sixteen
kilometers). We also swam off Seal Beach and broke our swims into half-mile
segments when we swam from the Seal Beach Pier to the northern jetty and
back, a mile round-trip. We worked on our pace because we had a set mile
course and kept track of our times each day. The currents did not vary much
from day to day, and we were able to easily monitor our progress. We also swam
along Sunset Beach, where there was a lot more surf and stronger currents.
Sometimes we would swim near the northern jetty at Surfside and swim in place
for half an hour because the current was so strong. At Huntington Beach, the surf
was typically three to eight feet (0.9 to 2.4 meters), and the current sometimes
was so strong that when we tried to swim forward, we were pushed backward for

--- Page 134 Text ---
the entire workout. What we learned was to keep working, keep going, and keep
trying to swim faster than the current. There were times when we had the current
at our backs, and we’d fly across the water at double our speed. It was so much
fun, especially after swimming into a current and seeing little or no progress.
It will be a challenge to figure out what you need to do to train for a moderate
to long open water swim. It is important to be totally prepared, though it is
equally important to make sure that you don’t overtrain. There was one coach I
swam with, after Don Gambril, who also coached Olympic swimmers. This
coach believed that if you were a distance swimmer, you needed to do excessive
distances in the pool, up to ten miles a day, and when he coached me, he felt that
I needed to swim six hours or roughly fifteen miles (24.1 kilometers) a day.
After two weeks of these workouts, I was too tired to sleep, didn’t want to eat,
and lost twenty pounds (nine kilograms) and my love of swimming. All of this
contributed to failure on my attempt to swim the Catalina Channel and break the
records, but I took two weeks off from swimming, went back to doing the
workouts that Dave and I created, which were no longer than ten miles a day,
and a few weeks later, I achieved my goal.
The key is to listen to your body and be honest with yourself, to know when
you can push yourself and when you need to rest.
Here are a few workouts for moderate and long swims, to give you some
ideas. Your level of conditioning and experience may differ from someone else’s,
so you need to develop workouts specifically for yourself—if you can, with a
coach or other open water swimmers who will give you the daily input you need
to reach your goals.
Some Ideas for a Five-Mile (Eight-Kilometer) Swim
WORKOUT 1
1. Warm up for the first mile (0.8 kilometers) and focus on your stroke.
2. Swim two miles (3.2 kilometers) and break them into eight four-hundred-meter swims/quarter-mile
segments. Alternate between sprinting four hundred meters and swimming at moderate pace.
3. Swim two miles at your pace.
WORKOUT 2
1. Swim a one-mile (0.8-kilometer) warm-up.
2. Swim one mile: two hundred strokes fast, two hundred strokes moderate, three hundred strokes fast,
three hundred strokes moderate, four hundred strokes fast, four hundred strokes moderate. Stretch out
for four hundred strokes and repeat until you complete the mile (1.6-kilometer) swim.

--- Page 135 Text ---
3. Swim three miles (4.8 kilometers) at your pace, trying to make each mile as close in time as you
can.
As a way to develop your sense of pace, have a friend walk the beach while
you swim at the same pace as the person walking. This becomes challenging
when you are swimming against a current, but you want to develop a way to feel
the speed of the current. When you are on a channel swim or a swim between
islands or across a bay, you may not be able to see the shore to gauge your
speed, so you need to be able to judge the speed of the current and adjust your
effort when you are swimming with or against it.
When you are swimming long distances, it is really important to work on your
pace and your endurance, and your training should reflect that.
Suggestions for a Ten-Mile (Sixteen-Kilometer) Swim
WORKOUT 1
1. Swim five miles (eight kilometers) broken into two segments. Swim the first two and a half miles
(four kilometers) at your pace. Swim the second two-and-a-half-mile segment faster than your pace.
Focus on the entry (or catch) part of your stroke.
2. On a long open water swim, you will experience the effects of currents and tides for a longer time
period. You will need to sustain your sprinting capability until you can break through the tide or
current. Swim at sprint speed for two and a half miles so you have completed seven and a half miles.
3. For the remaining two and a half miles, swim each half mile (0.8 kilometers) faster than the
previous. Make sure to stretch out and loosen up for at least four hundred meters.
WORKOUT 2
1 mile = 1.6 kilometers
1. Swim a one-mile warm-up.
2. Swim your second mile at a moderate pace.
3. Swim your third mile as a sprint.
4. Swim your fourth mile at a moderate pace.
5. Swim your fifth mile fast.
6. During your sixth mile, stretch out and focus on your stroke.
7. During your seventh mile, alternate five hundred strokes freestyle with five hundred strokes
backstroke.
8. During your eighth mile, alternate five hundred strokes butterfly with five hundred strokes
breaststroke.
9. Swim your ninth mile as a sprint.
10. Swim your tenth mile at pace.

--- Page 136 Text ---
Suggestion for a Fifteen-Mile Swim
You will need a competent kayaker on this swim for safety and navigation and so
you can hydrate and eat. Pick out a course alongshore that will allow you to
swim 7.5 miles (12 kilometers) with a turnaround point. Look carefully at the
map and note the distances, for example, between the pier and a cove, between a
cove and a peninsula, or between a peninsula and a sandy beach. Use these
points to create your workout: Warm up by swimming from the pier to the cove;
work on your pace by swimming from the cove to the peninsula; sprint from the
peninsula to the sandy beach. These workouts are really fun, and you get to
create them as you are doing them.
You may also want to swim fifteen miles (24.1 kilometers) from one point to
another. Years ago, Louise Comar—a friend who was training to swim the
Catalina Channel—and I swam just outside the wave break from the Malibu Pier
to the Santa Monica Pier. It was a fifteen-mile (24.1-kilometer) swim, and while
it was tough, and we got tired off and on during the swim, we had fun swimming
from one point to another, from a cluster of homes to a stand of palm trees at our
pace, or from an outcropping of boulders around a cove to the Hearst Museum at
sprint speed.
We worked hard when we swam into a current and tried to maintain our pace;
we stretched out our strokes and moved closer to the water’s surface and let the
sun warm our backs. This swim gave Louise the confidence to continue training
and complete the Catalina Channel swim.
If you plan to swim across a channel, these long swims with kayak, Zodiac, or
boat support will help you prepare. They give you a chance to mentally and
physically understand what it’s like to swim for a long distance, and they will
give you a chance to work with some of your crew so that they know what kind
of support you need and how you are doing during your swim.
The crew will also be able to observe you during your training and get to
know you better. They will be able to see if your stroke looks strong, if you’re
pulling or slipping water. They’ll be able to time your stroke rate and see if
you’re swimming on pace. They will be able to tell if you’re working hard or
struggling and should be able to tell if you are injured or showing symptoms of
hypothermia or hyperthermia.
These swims are training swims, and you always want to complete them if you
can, but if the weather conditions suddenly deteriorate, or you are not feeling
well, or things are going wrong, it is better to stop the swim and recover and
come back and complete it another day. The last thing you want to do is injure

--- Page 137 Text ---
yourself and then be out of the water longer than if you’d climbed out. Longer
swims are great indicators of how well you’ve trained. You can time each swim
and repeat the courses to see your progress. Sometimes you will see a big
increase in speed, and sometimes (say, if water conditions are rough) you will
see a slower speed, but every time you swim in the open water, you will gather
new experiences that will help you on longer swims.

--- Page 138 Text ---
Selection for Support and Swim

--- OCR from Page 138 Image 1 ---
Chapter 11
a

--- Page 139 Text ---
SKILLS REQUIRED FOR A KAYAKER
Most long open water swims—especially channel swims—require an escort boat
or multiple escort boats, depending on the channel and the number of swimmers.
Kayakers are a fantastic complement to the escort boats. They are able to make
sure a swimmer is doing okay and can maneuver closer than an escort boat.
To prepare for an open water swim, a kayaker must be able to kayak through
surf, to keep the swimmer on a straight course, and in case of emergency, to
respond and get a lifesaving device secured around a swimmer or help her hang
on to the kayak until the escort boat can provide additional assistance.
A kayaker must be able to direct a swimmer around kelp, rocks, and
underwater obstructions. Let the kayaker know what is needed to help you on
your swim so you’ll know if he is capable of fulfilling your requirements.

--- Page 140 Text ---
KAYAKER SELECTION
Here is the method the SEALs use to select a qualified kayaker:
~ Publish in a public place that you are seeking help and have people send in applications with a
drop-dead date planned backward from your race/open water swim.
~ Mandate that applicants furnish evidence of experience, and mandate references (training
attended, races supported, lives saved).
~ Toss all the iffy applications in the trash, along with all the ones that arrive late.
~ Set up interviews with the top three candidates after calling their references and asking specific
questions about skill levels.
~ Make applicants demonstrate their competence by setting up a kayak obstacle course, including
pulling you from the water.

--- Page 141 Text ---
KAYAKER COMPETENCY
The SEALs generate a short critical task list (CTL) to demonstrate a kayaker’s
competency. The first indicator is if she shows up with the necessary equipment:
life jacket, Warmies, waterproof bags, paddle, sunscreen, food, water, seat, aqua
socks or water shoes and gloves, rescue buoy, flashlight, extra glow sticks,
whistle, and extra batteries.
A qualified kayaker needs to know:
~ The rules (no touching the swimmer, how to pass food and drink)
~ How to operate a GPS
~ How to operate a radio/phone/walkie-talkie
~ How to set up the kayak
~ How to launch the kayak
~ How to get through surf—not in Lake Pacific surf but in Morro Bay surf
~ How to paddle for a long distance, specific to the needs of the swim
~ Demonstrate swimmer tow
~ Demonstrate swimmer rescue
~ How to right the kayak and save herself
~ Go over various mishap scenarios

--- Page 142 Text ---
SWIMMING ROUTE
It is best to swim with people who know a swimming area and to check in with
lifeguards and ask questions about the water conditions on that specific day. The
SEALs and I created the following list of things you need to consider before you
swim in the open water:
1. Route
Before swimming in any waterway, you need to identify and weigh the dangers:
~ Where are the shipping lanes? Will you be staying clear of the ships?
~ Where are the surf zones? Is the tide coming in or going out?
~ Are there shallow obstacles, such as pier pilings, that you can swim into?
~ Are there dynamic fishing nets and fishing lines that you can get tangled in?
~ Are there submerged rocks that you can swim into?
~ What are the risks in dangerous areas, and what can you do before the swim to
mitigate the risks?
2. Environmental Factors
~ What is the weather on the day you plan to swim?
~ What is the water quality?
~ What is the water temperature?
~ Have you spoken with local authorities about the swimming area?
~ Is there a local jellyfish bloom?
~ Are there sea snakes or dangerous animals?
3. Emergency Action Plan
~ Do you know what to do if something happens to your swimming buddy (or
buddies) during the swim?
~ Do you know how to contact lifeguards?
~ Do you have a cell phone and the numbers for local emergency responders?
~ Do you have coast guard contact numbers?
~ Do you know how to provide transport to the hospital?
4. What Are the Minimum Requirements for the Support Pilot/Boat?
~ What are the qualifications of the pilot?
~ Does he have certificates?

--- Page 143 Text ---
~ Has the boat been maintained?
~ What are the maintenance records on the motors, and is there a spare motor?
~ What is the maintenance record on the boat—has it been maintained periodically?
~ Has it been inspected by the coast guard?
~ What kind of medical training has the pilot had?
~ What type of supplies does the captain have on the boat?
~ Are there life jackets, survival suits, life rafts?
~ Do you have communication equipment: cell phone, radio, whistle, smoke, flare
gun?
~ What is the medical equipment on board?
~ What type of maintenance has been done on the motors, and how periodically? Is
there a spare?
~ Is the pilot willing to do swim support rehearsals and emergency rehearsals?
~ What is the go/no-go plan?
~ What is the threshold for the swimmer?
~ What is the threshold for the boat/kayak/Jet Ski? Can it be maneuvered in and out
of surf or is it too high?

--- OCR from Page 144 Image 1 ---
PART THREE

Intermediate
and

Advanced Swimmers

--- Page 145 Text ---
Open Water Swims Outside the Buoys with Boat Support
These guidelines are helpful in planning an open water swim that goes beyond
the swimming buoys and requires an escort boat and kayaks. Because conditions
are changing constantly, it is important to use this information just as a guideline,
to be aware of what’s happening in the water throughout the swim, and to adjust
to ensure the safety of the swimmer, crew, and boat. It is critical to the success of
a swim to have the pilot and crew act as professionally as possible. These
guidelines were developed with the invaluable recommendations of the U.S.
Navy SEAL officer/instructor L. Tadeus.
INFORMATION GATHERING/RESEARCH
There is no “one size fits all” when it comes to swimming and surface support—
unless you are funded for maximal support and have a small navy following you
on every swim. Swimmers need to take things like this into account when they
plan for a swim. The surface support required in great weather is minimal, and
the surface support required in bad weather is maximal. It will take more people
on the boat to help when the waves are big and the rain is coming down like
sheets of lead.

--- OCR from Page 145 Image 1 ---
Chapter 12
ee ee ee ee

--- Page 146 Text ---
The SEAL stressed:
~ Gather as much information as possible about the area where you intend to swim.
~ What are the prevailing meteorological and oceanographic conditions during the time of year
when you plan to swim?
~ What are the go/no-go criteria for the swim (the worst possible conditions you would want to
swim in)? Consider your ability and the crew’s and the support boats’. Swimmers, crews, and boats
will have different thresholds.
~ Know what water temperature to expect, and study the currents, winds, and waves.
~ Research the dangerous marine life in the water and treatments for run-ins.
~ You can’t beat local knowledge of an area. Talk to someone who is familiar with those waters.
~ As the time of the swim draws near, consult the most specific and up-to-date weather forecasts.
~ Visit the location before the swim. It helps to see the starting point and finish in advance,
although on many swims, you won’t know where you will finish until you get there.
~ Conduct short recreational swims in that location—you could learn something while at play.

--- Page 147 Text ---
SELECTING SUPPORT CREW
~ How much support do you need?
~ What is the required team makeup?
~ What individual qualifications are required?
~ What training is required for each team member?
ONE PERSON ON THE SURFACE IN CHARGE
This is very important. There needs to be one person on the surface in the boat
who is designated to be in charge of the swim. Conflicts can arise on swims
when it is not clear who is in charge. This problem usually occurs at a time when
a swimmer is in jeopardy and when a critical decision needs to be made. It’s
equally important to note that the person in charge can shift and become some
other crew member in an emergency. If a swimmer is injured, for example, the
on-scene medical expert will take charge. This must be understood and agreed
upon by everyone participating. You should address these questions before you
begin:
~ Is there training overlap so that if a team member goes down, the swim can still occur?
~ What equipment will each person carry?
~ How will the team communicate?
~ What training should the team conduct together after individual training is complete?
~ How do you handle personality conflicts?
There should be a full dress rehearsal of the swim in conditions as close as
possible to those expected on the swim. Even if it is a short thirty-minute swim,
it will give the team an opportunity to shake out any last-minute concerns.
SEALs believe the full dress rehearsal should include a casualty drill in which
the swimmer is hauled from the water and transported to the door of the nearest
appropriate treatment facility. It is important to do the casualty drill so that
everyone, including the swimmer, knows what to do. (As a swimmer, I would
want to conduct this rehearsal at least two days in advance of my swim, because
I don’t like to practice getting out of the water. I don’t like to practice giving up.
I don’t like to practice failure. It messes with my head. I want to practice
success, but the SEAL says realism is the key.) If done correctly, the casualty
drill is as valuable as the swim itself. If multiple methods of pulling the
swimmer from the water are available, they should all be tested—boat, Jet Ski,

--- Page 148 Text ---
kayak, surfboard. Also rehearse as if other members of the team have gone
down. Remember to debrief after the rehearsal.
PLAN FOR THE SWIM/MISSION
Logistics
~ Make a progressive training plan, planned backward from the date/time of the swim.
~ Create a detailed timeline of events—hourly/half hourly—from start to finish.
~ Determine the locations of team members throughout the swim.
~ Plan swim routes.
~ Coordinate transportation—planes, trains, automobiles, boats, Jet Skis, kayaks, etc.
~ Coordinate logistics—how the team will move the equipment.
~ Determine your real financial costs, including possible emergencies.
Food and Fuel
~ Who is in charge of the crew’s food, and what is required? Who is in charge of the swimmer’s
food? Are there specific requirements, such as warming liquids for the swimmer? Who will be
feeding the swimmer? How frequently will the swimmer be feeding and how much?
~ How much gasoline is required, and what is the backup for a longer swim or for an emergency?
Medical Considerations
There are swimmers who have died during races and swims from pre-existing
medical conditions. L. Tadeus recommends a medical screening—is the
swimmer medically capable of swimming? Has the swimmer had a recent
physical? A friend of mine had a physical check before his English Channel
attempt, and his doctors discovered that his blood pressure was dangerously high
from a metabolic condition. Swimming in cold water could have been life
threatening. The swimmer had to readjust his goals, swim in warm water, and
drop weight, and he has been very successful doing that. Is the crew aware of
any possible problems or physical limitations? On one Catalina Channel swim, a
swimmer mentioned to her crew that she could see only out of her right eye. In
rough conditions, she couldn’t change the side of the boat she swam on, to let the
boat absorb the rough seas. It also made navigation more difficult for her, and
she mentioned that in rough seas, she got seasick. This may have been in part
from not being able to see with both eyes, which perhaps affected her balance.
Objectives

--- Page 149 Text ---
The success of a swim may be determined largely by the crew. When selecting a
crew, consider what the objectives are of the support team. A good vacation?
Money? That warm, fuzzy feeling they get from watching athletes?
Camaraderie? Are they focused on the swimmer and the swim or on having a
party on the boat? Brief the team thoroughly. Everyone should participate in the
brief. Docs should talk medical stuff, boat coxswains should discuss how not to
run over a swimmer, and the swimmer should discuss the swim route. Make sure
everyone is engaged.
BRIEFING: EXPLAINING THE PLAN
The SEALs have adopted an effective method for briefing missions, and these
methods translate well to open water swimming. Note that timing of the briefing
is important.
Get the crew together the day or night before the swim and brief them so that
you can be sure the entire plan is clear to the support crew and swimmers. This
will give the crew and swimmers a chance to discuss and think about the swim
and to go over any questions. The brief contains a list of talking points that
prompt the person in charge to explain to the crew and swimmer, as well as
prompting a discussion that allows everyone to know what he or she is doing to
support the swim and the emergency action plan. The brief clarifies details such
as in what direction the swimmer will go, the jobs of the crew members, and
how often they will serve in a position before being spelled by another crew
member.
Things can change before a swim, so it is helpful to have a second briefing an
hour or two before the actual swim.
It helps to take a look at the method the SEALs use to plan their missions.
Whether they are planning for a training swim or a technically difficult mission
with many contingencies, they have developed a clear way to accomplish their
objectives, and their experience and techniques can be useful whether you are
planning a triathlon, a short ocean swim, or a major channel crossing. I wish I
had known about this method when I first began. It would have helped me
tremendously in planning and coordinating my swims.

--- Page 150 Text ---
SEAL MISSION PLANNING
The SEALs use three basic ways to conduct mission planning:
1. Well in advance. There is a mission on the horizon that is not at all time-sensitive for which
there is plenty of time to plan/train, say, four to six months.
2. Short notice. There is a mission on the immediate horizon that we have trained for but have a
short time to bring skills into razor-sharp condition. Think four days from being informed to being on
the way to the target.
3. Emergent (implies emergency, as in “it just emerged”). We have four minutes to be out the
door and on the way to the target.
L. Tadeus said, “I see a swim ‘operation’ as something that, if not done
regularly in a known location, resides somewhere between situations one and
two, above.”
PowerPoint is a great planning and briefing tool. Each number below would
have its own slide or a group of slides from which to brief and plan. Attached is
a sample brief. Notice that it contains a list of talking points that prompt the
instructor to engage the trainees in a deeper discussion of the evolution.
Example: Slides that SEAL instructors use to brief a 5.5-nautical-mile swim:
5.5 nm (10.1 km) Swim
Introduction
• Objective: Swim 5.5 nm (10.1 km)
• Emphasis: Proper stroke (underwater recovery) Buddy cohesiveness Safety
• Standard: Completion
• NO HANDS OUT OF THE WATER
Equipment
• Personal: Mask/fins/booties/rubber/UDT life jacket w/ flare (day)
• Medical: Ambu
• Comms: See list in comms locker
• Admin: Swim pair lists (2 and 1)
• Marops: Bouys × 2
• Extra gear: Extra mask/fins/booties/UDT life jacket + 1 flare

--- Page 151 Text ---
Execution
• Complete brief
• Inspection
• Muster on beach / Zodiac insert
• WT hit surf
• Swim to buoy / line up
• WT sound off
• Standby for “START”
• Start swim
Execution
• At turnaround
– Sound off with swim pair number, wait to be told to go
– Swim AROUND buoy
– Move out
• At end
– “Swim Pair One, Cake Eater and Smuckatelli”
– Bottom sample
• Move out (quietly)
• Swim to beach
Contingencies
• Recall: Light on ambu flashing
• Lost Buddy
• Buddy Rescue

--- Page 152 Text ---
• Pickup
– admin = one hand
– emergency = one hand waving
– then whistle, buddy’s flare, your flare
Safety Points
• 6-ft (1.8-m) max from buddy
• Watch out for boats
• No air in life jacket
Questions?

--- Page 153 Text ---
STRATEGY
Many channel swimmers and long-distance open water swimmers coordinate
their own swims, pay for them, and make the decisions on where they attempt
their swims. If they have to wait for favorable conditions but neither the weather
nor the tides are cooperating—and they are running out of time, patience, and
money—a sense of urgency builds, with an increasing desire to do the swim in
poor conditions. The pilot can add to this feeling by encouraging a swimmer to
go in less than ideal conditions, since he wants to get paid. Recently, a young
swimmer went to England to swim the English Channel. She was waiting
through one set of tides and had two swimmers scheduled to go before her. The
weather forecast continued to be poor. Her pilot suggested that she swim on a
spring tide. To even consider that, she had to be very fast to swim the majority of
the twenty-one miles in under six hours and make it to shore before the full force
of the tidal change. She also needed to have great weather. Given the weather
over the first four days of the neap tide (i.e., tide of minimum range on first and
third quarters of the moon), the best times to swim, it did seem likely that the
weather would be favorable for the spring tide. She knew that if she could not
swim on the neap tide, her option was to swim on the spring, the least favorable
time to swim, and risk not succeeding or to wait until the following year for
another attempt. She was fortunate that the other swimmers got off, and she was
able to attempt her swim, and she completed it in bad conditions. It would have
been much better for her—and for other swimmers planning to do a big swim—
to designate a “person in charge” of the swim, as the SEALs do.
In the case of open water swimming, the person in charge should be someone
who knows the swimmer and her abilities, is involved in the swim, and has some
nautical experience. The person in charge needs to be objective in deciding for
the swimmer whether a swim is a go or a no-go. The swimmer is the last person
who can be objective, due to the cost of the swim and his ego, psychology, and
need to see the goal realized.
L. Tadeus said that SEALs recognize that every time you get in the water, you
take your life into your own hands. They know that it is far smarter to put your
life in someone else’s hands—a very competent someone with the resources to
pluck you from the jaws of death. We have to take responsibility for the
decisions we make; more important, we have to take responsibility for the
decisions we don’t make. Free will is a bitch. There is always a smarter way to
do things, but people are free to do whatever they want. They can be obsessed if

--- Page 154 Text ---
they want. They can take meds and swim if they want. They can swim without
support if they want. They can ignore all the good advice in the world if they
want. They have no one to blame but themselves if they do. The person in charge
has to understand the bigger picture. The swimmer focuses on swimming; the
person in charge makes decisions and keeps the swimmer safe based on
prevailing environmental conditions, and cannot be afraid to say no, even to the
swimmer.
Note: The goal of planning is to keep bad things from happening, but you
should always plan as though bad things will happen anyway.

--- Page 155 Text ---
BACKUP PLANS
~ What if the water is too cold?
~ What if the water is too warm?
~ What if there is too much boat traffic?
~ What if the waves are too big for the swimmer or the boat?
~ What if the current is too strong?
~ Is there a bump day (a backup day)?
~ Is there a bump location (a backup location)?
SAFETY/OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT: HOW TO PREVENT
MISHAPS AND A FALSE SENSE OF URGENCY
You could encounter multiple risks during a swim. What can you do in advance
to mitigate or remove these risks?
Example for open water swimming: risk = hypothermia; mitigation methods =
acclimate to colder waters than you’ll be swimming in, have rewarming
equipment on hand, on-scene medical personnel, and support-team response
training.
You can reduce both the probability and the severity of a mishap, depending
on which controls (solutions) you implement for each risk. The following
diagram is a risk assessment worksheet used by SEAL instructors to assess risks
during a 3.5-mile (5.6-kilometer) and a 5.5-mile (8.8-kilometer) open water
swim and the controls that they implement to reduce risks.
Risk decisions have to be made at the appropriate level. A SEAL in charge of
the second phase of training can authorize training of low and medium risk. His
commanding officer can authorize high-risk training and will, if he is confident
that the SEAL in charge of second-phase training is taking the necessary
precautions. The SEAL in charge of second phase training has to build trust with
his commanding officer in order to earn his leadership role in extremely high-
risk training.
The SEAL captain in charge of training explained:
A false sense of urgency is the leading cause of mishaps. SEALs who
have worked for more than twenty-five years, with the clear view of
hindsight, realize that many of the accidents, injuries, or deaths that
occurred during their time with the teams were preventable.

--- OCR from Page 156 Image 1 ---
Rok Assesament Workshoet
‘Training Evolution: 35-Mile and 5.5-Mile Swims (Open Water)

Gate Sreparced by:

‘Organization

Marards Brobakslity of Effect of = Bink Lowel Control Implemented Becvichoal Fonidual Fosidual
Mahap Mishan Probability Effect Fisk Level

Drowning Salem 00) ‘Catadiroptic (I) iH Daaihy rate Usliboety {E) ‘Cabawirephic (1) MED
Top-wde ealety obaereers
Thestinagh whudhest ard iriiruchor sabety brits (ia wed 504)
Hudento-abel commertcation
Emergency Section Plan
HM on scene
bratroctor ORD goals
Hypesies Seldon 1) Critical (0) MED Badly rule Seldon (0) Pteerginval! (1) Low
Sabety briel
ender betel
Top-ede safety chascvert
Emergency Aulion Pls
HM on acme
Traitee Eineas
Traumatic Seldom 1D) Marginal (111) Low Satety brief Wedioety 1) Petizergirval (IIT) bow
Inpriea Habel heal
Corpuman on ucene
EVOKE on sees

Emergency Action Blin

--- OCR from Page 156 Image 2 ---
Risk Assessment Vorksheat
Training Evolution: 3.5-Mile and 5.5-Mile Swims (Qpen Water)

Salles Water | Sebdorn (Db Critical (0) ME Bhclchy rake Seldom (D1) Margiral (IT) Low
evlnacloio-dbaalert rafay
Shucert brief
Salety betel
‘Conpaman on uoana
Eeangery Actes Dan
levinactor COR quale
Trains ener inherecthy buoyant wet auto
Boot Trafic Seldom (0) | Catastrophe () ) HIGH | Adheee to bowt-toatuclert asfety ratio per aed phave admin Unkiely GE) | Catertrephic (0 MED
queies
Brief besak crmeniis cm maleby pereraestions
Shuclent brief
lastnactow barked
‘Civilian boat trac blocked from simmer
Boman gerety Aches Plan thee cuaghly briefed
HM on scene
Fatigue Lelie 1E) Maeiginal (1) LOW | Trane tress Unkbely(E) | Megigibleny | Low
Hydration and nutrition
‘Wiprhirg scheeckste chefted to enccnand for highesshessity PT

--- OCR from Page 156 Image 3 ---
Resk Assessment Warksheat
Training Evolution: 35-Mile and $.5-Mile Swans (Open Water)

fren rena Seldom () Cratical (if) ED Travnet Firean Lieder (E) Critical (1 Loe
Pulmonary Medical morchoringe
Edema (HPE)
Low Swinton Saleem (D9 Catadirepie (I) HIGH Brrepeter tasdintyy-becudt igeat atest ratory Lelivaby (E) ‘Catastrophe (1) MED
Basddy rule in place

Troll ore beed airvelor th dudenl groepe
lratrector-bo-absderd roti whifted inl valbibty
Salety bate! Chat mgh bendweireraen procedures]

Search proceckines

GPS esbeded bo mark leat hrc peitlion

Current aback
(Barger (Undiethy (9 Marginal (1) Low Sabety brie! Unkiorhy (E) Megligible (I¥) Low
Miprine Lite Dangeccun mavine-Lfe claw

HH on acess

--- Page 157 Text ---
To view a full-size version of this image, click HERE.

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 1 ---
Rak Aasenament Warksheat
Training Evolution: 35-Mile and 5.5-Mile Swims (Clpen WMaber)

Hypotheses Sekiom (Dt Critical (0) MED ‘Cheprh eabes fergie Unbboahy CE) ‘Cratenal (1) Low
‘Wet wait when appropriate
Bieckcal wend oring sbebentify dhadherds af righ Bor bergerabune-
related anjury
HM an scare
Seimereer rewarreng procedures
Senter! eres orien peered andl on hard
‘Naber Ghuality Lindley (ED Petigergireal (111) Low Beach and Bay Status Geport from MSW Medical ‘Unklorhy (Eh Meghgible (IV) Low
Deparonend
Shaclend hygiene biiefed by phan HE
Howe fl males hoo comtaminaled of viebebty boo bom
METOS Seldom (2) | Catastrophic () | HIGH | Nowwin # ovolution O80 cannot maintain vinibditycontrol of | Unblorhy (i) | Cabsvtrophic Ol MED
Condition: awe
brcreaned uafety ratio in poor viubebty conditions
High cucrest Lees ove commederation fae amen courne
igh Surk Seldom (0) | Catastrophic () | Hi | Trames Biren ‘Unklor iE} | Catavtrophis Of) MED
Server wh passe baling,
Houwevien #2 surler safety craft (kayak WR) conrat trove ee
dar! Urata SD Bary
Trenee wear both inherently bucyark eet uti and ust
aelinvebed Ww jac harks

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 2 ---
‘Organization:

ERViiumbulance:
Sack iy Saeed

Mlagh or Ping.

Seldom (0) ‘Catsalrophic [I} HIGH Vehicle tires defiahed upos entering beach to incrose Inaction | Unlikely (5)

Seldom 0D)

Risk Assessment Worksheet
Traaning Evelutean: 35-Mile and §.5-Mile Swims (Spon Waker)

Dake Prepared by

Adchtional weborke slancing by bo render aucelanne

VWohile recovery eqeipment siaged in vehicle

Additional wphorhy mill replace d REY carwand bey recarmened bo
respond [o panaiide ereigencian
long-distance wir,

Marginal 0) Low Estra aqme tag on chase baal foe eavp dpoens reed

vem
reread igi tigen ioe Lo mali entry
Surf pauage training, practice, brief

Page 5

Critical (11)

Mingligiohe (0M)

Low

--- Page 158 Text ---
The diagram above depicts a series of swiss cheese slices, with each
slice corresponding to a distinct factor, including training, preparation,
people, leadership, weather, et cetera. When a hole in each slice lines
up with the next, that’s an accident chain starting. When the holes line
up from start to finish, that’s an accident chain occurring. Any one
slice can be pulled out and the chain is broken, preventing the
occurrence of the accident. The interesting thing is that one single
factor is present in an overwhelming number of accidents: a false
sense of urgency. This false sense of urgency—miscalculation of
actual time versus perceived time available—is present in so many
accidents that it has to be something worth studying.
With the SEALs, risk management plans are the leader’s business
(this information applies to the person in charge of an open water
swim). It is not a “check the block” paperwork drill. Good risk
assessment and management is equal parts leadership, experience, and

--- OCR from Page 158 Image 1 ---
Operational Risk
Management (ORM)

Slices of swiss cheese: when all

the holes align, the result is an
accident, injury, or death. Any
one factor can interrupt the
accident chain.

Scenario

The false sense of urgency is a
Accident, injury, or death | factor in a surprising number of
mishaps.

Contingency plans

ORM = common sense + experience +
attention to detail. It is NOT a “check the

block” process.
Leaders do ORM; lawyers do culpability.

--- Page 159 Text ---
attention to detail.
As an added risk management requirement, the SEALs appoint one
person to an event who can interrupt a fatality by stepping back and
looking at the scenario with an unbiased eye. That’s why they have
one leader in each phase of training or a race who stands back from the
event. That person has the requisite clarity of view to see the details,
understand the big picture, and step in to prevent an accident. That
person has the authority to say “stop” or “whoa” or “no” and, in doing
so, prevent an accident. This method directly applies to open water
swimming. It would certainly make sense to have this person
connected with an open swimming race or on board during an open
water swim.
As a SEAL captain shares, “Life is not a risk-free event. Risk is
actually fun and what drives many people to enjoy life. But calculated
risk is the opposite of gambling. The SEALs are trained to calculate
risk and make sound decisions. Navy Special Warfare doesn’t train
gamblers. SEALs are trained to calculate risk and make sound
judgments.”
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN: WHO IS NOTIFIED IN ADVANCE AND
HOW TO REACH THEM DURING THE SWIM
Use an emergency action plan: what to do in the event of a mishap. Ask the
following questions:
~ What are all the possible injuries? This includes both the support team and the swimmer. If
something can happen, however remote the chance, plan for it. Murphy is out there, enforcing his
law.
~ What is the immediate treatment for each?
~ Is immediate-treatment equipment with the support team?
~ What is the extended treatment for each?
~ Is anyone on scene qualified to provide immediate aid for any injury?
~ Where are the nearest treatment facilities for major injuries?
~ How do you get to treatment facilities from the location you are swimming in?
~ What is the nearest identifiable location, if you are relying on 911, that an ambulance can use to
meet or locate you?
~ Have you staged an ambulance onshore?
~ Do you know the numbers for LifeFlight and a good location for them to land?
~ How do you communicate with them? By megaphone? Hand signals?
~ Do treatment facilities accept the swimmer/team members’ insurance?

--- Page 160 Text ---
~ If you are relying on the USCG, what are their go/no-go criteria for coming to save the
swimmer? They’ll do the best they can, but if someone goes swimming during a hurricane, he may
end up taking responsibility for his actions at the expense of his own life.

--- Page 161 Text ---
COMPLETION OF SWIM AND REWARMING
~ Plan the best you can.
~ Conduct the swim with what you have.
~ Execute the rewarming plan (if required).
~ Execute medical testing (if required).

--- Page 162 Text ---
DEBRIEFING
If a swim requires this level of planning, then it requires debriefing. Rehearsals
require debriefing, too. Everyone should sit down and discuss what went right
and what went wrong. If something went went wrong, discussion should ensue
about what caused it. Recommendations should follow on how to keep it from
going wrong in the future. Document, document, document. If you don’t record
it, it didn’t happen. Given enough time, all the experience and lessons learned
will fade away unless there is a way to review them. For a swim you are doing
the first time but intend to repeat using what you have learned, you can go from
months of planning down to minutes with the right team and the right swimmer
on future swims.
FURTHER SEAL ADVICE WHEN PLANNING A SWIM
You may have specific questions for organizing an open water swim. For
instance, how do you determine if a pilot is qualified? How do you know if the
boat you are using has been inspected and will operate safely? What kind of aid
equipment do you need on the support boat? How would you rehearse before a
swim? How would you check the weather forecast before a swim? Do you write
down the crew’s roles and responsibilities so they know precisely what they will
be doing during a swim?
There are specific training certificates for seamanship and boat handling. For
example, L. Tadeus has certificates for training in F-470 Zodiac, 25-foot (7.6-
meter) Boston Whaler, 11-meter rigid inflatable boat, 25-foot aluminum-hull
skiff, outboard motor repair, CPR (Red Cross), basic lifesaving, marine radio
operator’s permit, and inland and international rules of the road. He is also
licensed in numerous types of sailing, inboard and outboard vessels up to two
hundred tons near coastal by International Yacht Training through the Maritime
Institute in Point Loma, California. The licenses are recognized in twenty-two
different countries. He recommends looking for coast guard (USCG) licenses as
well. Anyone can buy a boat; no certificates or licenses are required unless the
boat is made available for charter. It is not enough to be qualified.
A pilot should also be current. L. Tadeus keeps a sea log every time he goes
out on a boat, the same way he keeps a dive log every time he goes underwater, a
demo log every time he blows something up, and an air log every time he jumps
out of a plane. The point is, a qualified pilot should have documentation of his

--- Page 163 Text ---
experience, both volume and currency. Any pilot who doesn’t have such
documentation probably isn’t worth the effort.
To check out the boat, do a self-inspection and ask for records of inspections
by reputable authorities. If a boat has not been inspected by the U.S. Coast
Guard, you probably won’t want to hire it for support for an open water swim.
Here is a list of the aid equipment you need to check for on a boat: floatation
devices, their locations markers (GPS, EPIRB), and boat hooks. Is there
anything on board that would help a struggling swimmer until physical aid could
be rendered? Look to see if the boat has a swimmer cutout or a ladder. Does the
boat have a positively buoyant spine board to cross-deck a swimmer from boat
to boat or boat to pier? Is the setup of the boat suitable for a swim? If the boat
was originally set up for fishing, does it have a diving platform to assist the crew
and swimmer when needed during the swim? It is also important to determine
fuel costs before your swim. It can cost up to fifteen hundred dollars to fill up a
decent-sized vessel—a forty-foot Sport Fisher, for example—no small cost. The
overriding concern is whether the boat can carry enough fuel to run engines and
generators at slow speeds for many hours and still have enough to handle
contingencies and mishaps.
NOAA is the ultimate authority on weather, but their forecasts can be very
general. There are local weather sources that are much more specific for a given
area. USCG publishes local weather advisories on specific MARBAND channels
every few minutes for moment-to-moment changes. Note that USCG publishes a
Notice to Mariners (NOTAMS) that gives updates to local hydrographic
changes; this is a good source to consult for official local knowledge on physical
oceanographic conditions.
There is a lot of value in writing down roles and responsibilities for the pilot
and each crew member. Your crew may need some advice on how to organize,
direct, supervise, and lead a support team. While some roles and responsibilities
may overlap slightly, roles should be well understood and distinct for
efficiency’s sake during mishap response—being able to respond when
something goes wrong.
The SEALs rehearse everything they can before a mission. It is equally wise
to do this before a swim. There were times when I did not like the situation
surrounding a rehearsal. Before my swim in Antarctica, the ship’s doctor
suddenly decided that the crew and I needed to rehearse my being pulled out of
the water. He wanted me to act like I had experienced cardiac arrest, and have
my crew put me on a stretcher and carry me up the ship’s stairs. What the doctor
was asking me to do was to rehearse my death. If you jump into extremely cold
water, there is a chance that you can overstimulate your vagus nerve and cause

--- Page 164 Text ---
your heart to stop.
For two years I had trained specifically for the swim in Antarctica, and I had
psychologically prepared for it. I believed it would be possible to swim a mile in
32-degree F (0-degree C) water in a swimsuit, swim cap, and goggles. I had
planned out the swim in my mind and how it would unfold—I didn’t want to
rehearse my death. It was the opposite of everything I had been doing to prepare
myself. I told the doctor that I could not participate in the drill, that another
member of my crew had offered to take my place. None of it made sense,
because the ship’s crew had already developed a quick and efficient way of
extracting people from the water and getting them onto the ship. They pulled the
victim into the Zodiac and, with a crane, lifted the Zodiac with the victim onto
the ship’s bow and then carried the victim to a room where the ship’s doctor
could attend to the victim.
The ship’s doctor wanted to try something new. My crew rehearsed with him.
One crew member was placed on a stretcher and tied down. Three to four
members of the crew tried to lift the stretcher and carry her up the ship’s stairs,
but the angle was too steep and they nearly dropped the stretcher, with her on it,
into the water three times. I was glad I didn’t participate in the drill, which
occurred only an hour before my swim. Now, as I look back on it with the
SEALs’ input, I see that there’s a lot of value to be gained from using the actual
swimmer in a mishap drill. If I had to do it again, I would participate in the
casuality drill—but a few days, not hours, before my swim.

--- Page 165 Text ---
MEDICAL CHECK BEFORE SWIM
It is very important to have a swimmer medically checked out before a swim.
There are medical conditions that preclude extreme swimming (hole in the
heart), medical conditions that require adjustment of swim conditions (blood
pressure), and conditions that could increase risk without mitigation (one blind
eye).
When I was planning my open water swims, often my crew and I would
discuss the plan for a year. When we reached the location for the start of the
swim, where I would train for a week or two, we would discuss, question, and go
over details. We would spend hours thinking and refining ideas. And just before
the swim, we would go over the plan—the brief—again. Because we’d discussed
our plan so many times, it did not take long to brief the crew. I asked L. Tadeus
how he determines the amount of time to be devoted to a brief.
The complexity of the swim drives the complexity of the brief. For
SEALs doing a pool dive, the brief is a five-minute conversation. A
sixty-two-man trainee dive using contract dive vessels takes three
excruciatingly thorough briefs to trainees, instructors, and boat crews,
covering a total of about three hours using PowerPoint.
It’s unlikely that a swimmer will have access to his own emergency
response vehicle. But if a swimmer has access to support vessels, he
may also have access to an emergency response vehicle. In either case,
the boat has to get the swimmer to a location where he can link up
with an emergency response vehicle for follow-on transport to a
medical facility.
Providing that both the boat and the ambulance can get to a common
location, how do you direct the ambulance to that spot? Most piers
don’t have an address. If the location is remote, then you are looking at
Air Evac. Do you know anyone who is capable of assessing a
helicopter landing zone and talking the bird to that location? We can
do this in five minutes, but we rehearse it. In a situation where seconds
are crucial, there’s not much time to figure it out on the fly.
The bottom line is: The swim route isn’t the only route you need to
think out in advance. Despite an inspection, a boat can break down.
SEALs do at least a cursory inspection to tell whether a boat is
obviously near breakdown or in good shape, but the rest is in fate’s

--- Page 166 Text ---
hands. Boats break. That’s what they seem designed to do. There
should be a contingency plan in place: Two is one, one is none.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LONG TRAINING SWIMS AND
DOCUMENTATION
Recently, Erez Israeli contacted me from Israel. He was starting to train for a
ten-mile swim in the Sea of Galilee. He’d learned to swim only two years before.
He had run a couple of marathons and competed in some full-length triathlons.
He said, “I need to try something interesting. Something that will be challenging
and keep me in shape.” He asked me to help him with his training and
preparation for a long-distance swim. He needed assistance with his stroke, and
he listened to my suggestion to film a video of his swimming. He sent it to a
stroke technician who analyzed his stroke and gave him pointers. Erez worked
with Dani Jaituv, a top swimmer and coach in Israel. Dani helped with his speed
and endurance. Erez coordinated boat support with swimming friends in Israel.
Erez called me the week before, a couple of days before, and the evening
before his swim to ask for any additional advice. I suggested that he pack his
swim bag at least a couple of days before his swim and go through a checklist of
the things he would need: at least one extra swimsuit, pair of goggles, and swim
cap; two or three towels for himself; skin lubricant; and anything he thought he
needed for the swim, including food, water bottles, and other fluids he planned
to drink during his swim. Even though he would be swimming in the Sea of
Galilee and the water and air would be warm, I suggested that he bring warm
clothes, because once he stopped exercising, he would stop producing heat, and
the cooled blood beneath his skin would circulate to his core and drop his
temperature. I suggested that he have water shoes, flip-flops, or aqua socks that
he could put on at the end of the swim, in case there were freshwater clamshells
or broken glass on the sand when he was climbing to shore. I also suggested that
he wear clear goggles in the dark and smoked or tinted goggles during the day to
protect his eyes from UVA and UVB rays. I sent him the following advice
specific to the swim:
1. Feed Every Twenty Minutes to Every Half Hour
~ Try warm fluids. [If he’d been training for a hot-water swim, I would have
suggested cold fluids.]
~ See which fluids work best for you during a swim. Limit this test to two kinds of
fluids during each training swim.
~ See which foods work best for you during a swim. Limit the test to one or two

--- Page 167 Text ---
types of solid foods.
~ Have your crew record what you are eating, how much, and how frequently.
~ Make your feedings brief so you stay warm.
~ Try to feed quickly to maintain your body heat.
2. Have Your Support Crew Take Your Stroke Rate Every Half Hour, Before They Stop You to
Feed
This way they can get you at your pace, not when you’re slowing to feed.
3. Have Your Pilot Plot Your Progress on the Navigational Chart and Indicate the Distance You
Have Swum and Your Speed Every Half Hour
4. Have the Pilot Indicate Wind Speed and Direction Every Half Hour and Note It on a Chart or
in a Log
5. Have the Pilot Indicate Current Speed and Direction and Note Them in a Log
The SEAL observed, “They better be doing this anyway—it’s important from an evidentiary
perspective in case they run aground or sink.”
6. Have Your Crew Evaluate You During Your Feedings
They need to make sure you aren’t going into hypothermia (or hyperthermia, during a hot-water
swim). They need to look at your shoulders and lips and make sure they aren’t bluish in color. They
need to look at your fingers at the beginning of the swim and see the way you normally swim and
then check to see if they are spreading apart. If you can’t keep your fingers together as you normally
do, your brain may be cooling down and you might be losing fine motor control. L. Tadeus
suggested, “Have your crew ask you questions that will make you think, such as, ‘What was the day
three days ago?’ ” He also recommended: “Have your crew ask you, ‘How are you feeling?’ You
need to be able to respond, ‘I feel fine.’ If you can’t say that phrase or can’t articulate it clearly, then
you may be going into hypothermia.” If you are swimming in a desert environment and the air
temperature is hot and the water is seventy-five degrees, make sure you’re drinking enough fluids
and you aren’t overheating. Your crew should be aware if you are excreting fluid; if you aren’t, you
probably aren’t drinking enough fluid.
During the brief feeding stops, your support crew will ask how you are feeling. It is important to
record it, because when the swim is completed, you can pinpoint when you were feeling good and
when things were tough. After the swim is completed, you can look at these points and figure out if
there is a way to improve. Here are some of the questions you can ask yourself: Do I need to do more
workout swims in rougher conditions? Was I tired because I need to train more intensely, or was my
blood sugar low and I needed more food or fluid? Did I lose my mental focus? Did I doubt my ability
to complete the swim?
Look at your workouts that led up to the swim and see where you can improve. You might need to
add more intensity to your workouts or stroke work, or focus more on pace. By going the distance in
water conditions similar to those of your big swim, you will strengthen yourself mentally and
physically, and you will be more prepared for your next swim.
7. Apply at Least Three Layers of Sunscreen Before You Swim
In open water, you need to prevent sunburn. Apply the first layer of waterproof sunscreen at least
two hours before your swim, then apply a second coating an hour and a half before, and a third layer
at least an hour before you swim. You may want to have a friend apply the sunscreen, especially on
your back. If you apply it yourself, wear surgical gloves or wash your hands well with soap and
water so you don’t get any sunscreen on your goggles.
8. Visually Record Your Swim
Keep a written and video record of your swim.
Erez completed his first ten-mile swim in the Sea of Galilee. His crew recorded the swim, and he
was able to go over the information with his support crew and coach, figuring out what worked and
what didn’t. He made corrections, adjusted his workouts and his stroke, worked on his speed and
pace, and a few months later, with a strong and knowledgeable support crew, he swam the length of

--- Page 168 Text ---
the Sea of Galilee, a thirteen-mile swim in a straight line, though he swam closer to fifteen miles.
After that success, he planned to swim across the Catalina Channel, but during his health check, his
physician told him that it was not healthy for him to carry the extra weight he’d need to insulate him
from the cold on the Catalina swim or in the English Channel. He was tremendously disappointed.
He said he gave himself an hour to be upset and then put it in perspective. He realized that the reason
he was swimming was to be healthy, and he would not be healthy if he carried extra weight. He took
my suggestion and changed his goal to long-distance warm-water swims.
He found a group of qualified support people and friends who helped him and guided him. He
swam the length of the Sea of Galilee twice—a distance of 26.2 miles (42.1 kilometers)—in 75-
degree F (23.8-degree C) water, in a time of eighteen hours and fifty-one minutes. He accomplished a
long-distance swim off Croatia, has set new open water goals, and is now training for a double-length
triathlon.

--- Page 169 Text ---
Dangerous Marine Organisms
This chapter applies to all levels of open water swimmers. There are many
dangerous marine animals in the world’s oceans, and there are volumes written
by physicians and biologists. The goal for this section is to highlight some of the
most dangerous and most encountered animals and to include up-to-date
treatments advised by physicians who are experts in this area.
Warnings that your parents gave you as a child, “Watch where you step” and
“Look but don’t touch,” should be heeded in the ocean environment, especially
in tropical waters. Some of the most beautiful sea animals produce powerful and
even life-threatening stings or bites. These animals may also pose a problem on
the beach.
A few years ago, when a friend invited me to swim off the remote islands of
Fiji, I researched the area and talked to local Fijians before I went swimming.
They pointed out the animals I should avoid, and I went for a long warm swim
on the shore side of a coral reef. The water was transparent turquoise,
delightfully warm, and teeming with life. There were so many beautiful alien-
shaped sea animals and brilliant-colored fish. It was one of the most fun and
fascinating swims that I ever had.
When I climbed out of the water, the palm trees were swaying slowly in the
heavy, humid breeze. I went for a long beach walk and met a couple of local
Fijians from the small village nearby. They noticed that I was barefoot and asked
why I wasn’t wearing water shoes on the beach. They said that with the tidal
change, small poisonous sea snakes often get left in tiny pools of water on the
beach, and they bite. Visitors should wear water shoes.
RESEARCH SEMITROPICAL AND TROPICAL WATERS BEFORE
SWIMMING

--- OCR from Page 169 Image 1 ---
Chapter 13
A SS. as

--- Page 170 Text ---
Before entering freshwater lakes, ponds, streams, and rivers, talk with locals
about animals and fish that might cause health concerns or problems.
This was something that Beverly Johnson taught me. Beverly was known for
her expertise as a world-class rock climber and mountaineer; she also worked on
documentary films all around the world. She traveled to Queensland, Australia,
to work on a project connected with the Great Barrier Reef. She was staying at a
hotel in Darwin near a river. It was summer and extremely hot and humid, and
she longed to go for a swim. She asked the hotel manager if she could swim in
the river, and he said she could, but the way he answered made her feel uneasy,
and she thought he might be teasing her. She asked for more information. The
manager explained that there were no restrictions on swimming in the river, but
he wouldn’t do it. He said there were crocodiles that lounged on the riverbanks
and fed in the river. Beverly decided to forgo the river swim.
The following marine animals are dangerous, and swimmers should do their
best to avoid them.

--- Page 171 Text ---
BRISTLE WORMS
Bristle worms are annelid worms. Each segment of the bristle worm has a pair of
fleshy protrusions called parapodia, and these contain numerous bristles called
chaetae, which are made of chitin. There are more than ten thousand species of
bristle worms found in all waters frequented by swimmers and divers. There are
bristle worms that live in the coldest ocean temperatures of the abyssal plain,
tolerate the extreme high temperatures near hydrothermal vents, are found at all
depths of the ocean, and are also found in fresh water.
Bristle worms are often brightly colored and multicolored; they may be
iridescent or even luminescent. Most bristle worms are under four inches in
length, though some may reach up to almost ten feet. When a worm is
stimulated, its body contracts and the bristles are erected. The bristles can
penetrate skin like cactus thorns and are very difficult to remove. Some marine
worms are also able to inflict painful bites and may cause a burning sensation or
a red itchy rash. These occur most often on the hands and fingers. Untreated, the
pain usually disappears after a few hours, but the itching and swelling may last
two to three days.
Paul Auerbach, MD, MS, is the Redlich Family Professor of Surgery in the
Division of Emergency Medicine at Stanford University School of Medicine and
an expert in wilderness medicine and on marine animal stings. He wrote the
book Medicine for the Outdoors, 5th Edition (see Sources for website address;
this page). In his book, Dr. Auerbach covers a much wider range of marine
animals and other medical treatments. For this manual I focused on the marine
animals that swimmers are likely to encounter.
Treatment for Bristle Worms
Dr. Auerbach gave the following recommendations for treating bristle worm
stings: Remove all large visible bristles with tweezers. Then gently dry the skin,
taking care to avoid breaking or further embedding the spines. Apply a layer of
adhesive tape, rubber cement, or a facial peel to remove the residual smaller
spines. If the inflammation is significant, the victim may benefit from the
administration of topical hydrocortisone 1 percent lotion.

--- Page 172 Text ---
CORAL REEFS
Part of the reason many of us swim in the open water is to have unique
experiences, to see parts of the world that we could never see from land. Some
of my most pleasurable swims and dives have been around coral reefs off
Australia, Fiji, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, South Africa, Hawaii, and the Out Islands
in the Bahamas. There’s nothing like swimming through warm transparent
waters, seeing a world teeming with colorful clown, angel-and triggerfish
hovering above the coral recesses. It is mesmerizing to watch soft corals
swaying in the ocean currents, and the blue iridescent-mantled clams slowly
opening and closing their giant shells, and schools of silvery fish swirling by.
Swimming above coral reefs is like entering giant aquariums without walls.
One of the world’s experts on coral reefs, Cindy Hunter, a biologist at the
University of Hawaii, appreciates the vast beauty of the reefs but recognizes an
equal significance:
Besides being thrilling to swim over, coral reefs also form the base of
the food chain around tropical coastlines. This is where animals,
microbes, and plants mingle, creating relationships that scientists are
still figuring out. Corals themselves house tiny golden-brown algae
inside their own cells, and use the carbohydrates produced by their
“housemates” for energy to build their skeletons. These hard skeletons
of coral colonies give myriad other reef creatures places to shelter and
forage for food. Some parrot fish crunch up coral skeletons with their
strong front teeth, pooping out tons of new sand each year. When life

--- Page 173 Text ---
gets stressful (as when global warming results in water temperatures
higher than about two degrees above the summer norm), the corals
eject the algae, resulting in ghostly pale reefs—also known as coral
belching—which may take many months to recover, if at all.
The coral reefs off Hawaii are comprised of compact colonies of many
identical individual “polyps.” The individual polyps secrete calcium carbonate
and form a hard skeleton and create colonies that comprise a reef. Some corals
use stinging cells on their tentacles to catch plankton. Corals reproduce by
spawning, using day length and moon phases to synchronize the release of eggs
and sperm. Finger corals reproduce near midnight, just after the full moon, while
others, such as rice corals, spawn for a few hours after sunset at the new moon
during the summer months.
Cindy teaches a minicourse at the University of Hawaii called Romance on
the Reef in which students can watch the corals spawn to create new reefs. She
says there are more than sixty species in Hawaii that vary in size, shape, and
color. Corals are nature’s most exquisite underwater sculptures. The reefs serve
as natural barricades to ocean waves and protect the Hawaiian Islands as well as
other landmasses from erosion.
Cindy advised me not to get too close to the coral while swimming. She
explained that the coral is sharp and rigid and can scrape and cut the skin, and a
coral cut may become easily infected. She also advised me not to walk on the
reef. Coral is fragile and can break off easily. It may take a full year for some
species of coral to regrow an inch.
Always talk with the lifeguards and local people about the water and reef
conditions. Tidal changes have a large impact on the reef and on safety. Calm
blue waters can be deceptive.
Mark, a friend who is a beach lifeguard and a top open water swimmer,
traveled with his wife to Hawaii for a vacation. The water was sparkling blue
and calm, and the tide was high when they swam out to investigate the reef.
They’d gotten caught up in the surrounding beauty when Mark suddenly noticed
that the tide was moving out. The waves were breaking on the exposed reef and
growing larger as the tide moved farther out. Mark realized that they had to
swim toward land to avoid being slammed onto the reef by the waves. He
watched the swells, found a lull in the waves, and managed to get his wife in
safely, but he sustained scrapes and cuts from the coral.
Even small coral and barnacle cuts can become very serious. Tropical waters
contain considerable numbers of uncommon (on land) bacteria, and cuts can
rapidly become infected, sometimes with these germs.

--- Page 174 Text ---
David Yudovin learned this during a first crossing in Indonesia from Pulau
Tanah Masa to Pulau Pini. When he was close to shore, he swam over a coral
reef where the water was stagnant and very warm (92 degrees F, or 33.3 degrees
C). He nicked his foot on the coral and didn’t think anything of it, but the water
was full of bacteria, and within hours his foot swelled and a staphylococcus
(staph) infection started traveling up his leg. His temperature rose to 104 degrees
F. He tried the local antibiotics manufactured in Jakarta, but they were not as
potent as the antibiotics manufactured in the United States. Though they held the
infection back, he realized he needed to get home to see his doctor and obtain
more potent medications. It has taken him three months to heal and feel normal
again.
Infections from coral cuts or cuts from shellfish are not unusual in tropical
waters. A friend who has been involved in outrigger canoeing for years once told
me that many tropical islands do not have sewage treatment facilities and that
human waste drains directly into the ocean. Know where the sewage drains are
located, and the current water movements around the islands, to avoid swimming
in contaminated water.
You may want to consult your primary care or travel medicine practitioner
before you leave on your trip, and find out if it’s possible to obtain a prescription
for antibiotics and instructions to carry with you in case they are needed.
Treatment for Coral and Barnacle Cuts
L. Tadeus describes barnacles as underwater razor blades. If you are cut by coral
or barnacles, Dr. Paul Auberbach recommends:
~ Seek medical treatment at once if the cuts are severe or if there are any signs of infection.
~ If you suffer small scrapes or cuts, scrub them with soap and water, then thoroughly wash with
fresh disinfected water.
~ If the wound is causing a stinging sensation, rinse it briefly with vinegar. This should help
reduce the stinging. Be sure to rinse the vinegar completely from the wound.
~ Flush the cut or scrape with a mixture of one-half water and one-half medicinal over-the-counter
hydrogen peroxide to remove coral fragments, then flush the wound with fresh disinfected water.
~ Wash the wound daily. Apply bacitracin or another similar antiseptic ointment three to four times
per day.
Coral cuts are notorious for becoming infected. Check the coral cuts at least
once a day to see if they are becoming inflamed, swollen, red, or tender. If the
wound develops into a festering sore or an ulcer with drainage, or if redness
spreads on the skin around the wound area, seek immediate medical attention.

--- Page 175 Text ---
FIRE CORAL
Fire coral is a marine animal that can sting in a manner similar to that of
jellyfish. It is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical waters, and
swimmers and divers often mistake it for seaweed. Fire corals have tiny stinging
cells. Once when I was off the Bahamas learning how to snorkel, my leg brushed
up against a patch of fire coral. The sting burned, but it did not cause shortness
of breath, swelling tongue, or tightness in my chest, which would have signified
an allergic reaction. I followed the advice of medical experts, who recommend
the following:
~ Rinse the affected area with salt water, then apply vinegar to the sting area (isopropyl alcohol
works equally well).
~ Check the sting area for tiny adherent fragments. If there are any, remove them with tweezers.
~ Check the wound daily. If it is inflamed but not infected (you may need a medical expert to make
this determination), apply hydrocortisone cream two or three times a day to reduce itching, and apply
alcohol to prevent infection.
Dr. Auerbach also recommends using citrus (for example, fresh lime) juice
that contains citric, malic, or tartaric acid.

--- Page 176 Text ---
JELLYFISH
Jellyfish are commonly known as jellies or sea jellies. They inhabit every ocean
and live in depths ranging from surface waters to the ocean’s greatest depths.
Members of the jellyfish family that are of concern to swimmers include fire
coral, hydroids, sea wasps, and anemones.
There are more than fifteen hundred species of jellyfish, and they are
exquisitely designed animals. Some have clear transparent domes and tentacles,
while others are opaque and multicolored. With their tentacles splayed out,
jellyfish often resemble flowers. They move slowly, rhythmically, and gracefully
as they pulsate through the water. They range in size from barely visible to the
human eye to over three feet in diameter. Some jellyfish, such as certain moon
jellies, do not sting, while others produce powerful stings that can be potentially
dangerous or even life threatening.
A jellyfish sting occurs when a person comes in contact with the tentacles or
appendages. The jellyfish inject toxins into the swimmer’s skin. These toxins can
cause stings that range in severity from a mild burning sensation and redness to
excruciating pain and severe blistering of the skin. Symptoms may include
nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, and muscle spasms. Jellyfish don’t have to
be intact to produce stings. Tentacles that break off the animal and float in the
open water, surf, or on the beach may retain their potency for months.
Before entering any natural body of water, check with the local fishermen,
swimmers, lifeguards, surfers, boaters, coast guard, divers, navy, marine
biologists, or any other people who might know if there are jellyfish in the area.
There are often times of the year and places in the world where jellyfish are

--- Page 177 Text ---
more prevalent. In many areas that have been overfished, there are greater
numbers of jellyfish.
Kelly Gleason is a maritime archaeologist and an open water swimmer who
swims and dives off Hawaii and monitors the jellyfish populations. She noted
two types that are problematic in Hawaii. The first is the man-of-war—but be
advised that what people in Hawaii call the man-of-war jellyfish is a different
species from the larger jellyfish of the same common name, typically found in
the Atlantic in the summertime. The Atlantic Ocean version is quite hazardous.
In Hawaii, the man-of-war are tiny purple creatures approximately the size of
golf balls, with long, stringy tentacles. Gleason said, “Most of the time it is the
floating tentacles that get people. They can feel razor-sharp, but the sting is
usually temporary, and I’ve always managed them okay. Some people scar really
badly from them, but that is just an individual thing. They tend to accumulate on
the windward and south sides of Oahu and can be seasonal (worse in the fall,
when winds are strong on the windward side), but you can run into them at any
time.”
The second species of jellyfish that keep people out of the Hawaiian waters
are the box jellyfish. Gleason said,
People who are really careful about them will stay out of the water
when they are around. They arrive ten days after a full moon, so they
can be predicted. Places with heavy tourism, like Hanauma Bay, close
when the box jellies are out. The stings are really bad and can send
you to the hospital. I’ve heard stories of people getting stung and then
needing assistance to get back in to shore. When box jellies are out, if
they are bad, you will see them washed up onshore. That is a way we
can tell if it is a few days after the ten-day window. It’s best to check
the shoreline and always best to be conservative. The lifeguards are
pretty well versed in jellyfish and particularly box jellies, so lifeguards
are always a good source of info if you should go in the water.
Prevention of Jellyfish Stings
To prevent stings, find out if jellyfish are prevalent in the area that day. If they
are, swim in a different area.
There are a number of Australian swimmers and surfers who wear “sting”
suits or “stinger” suits. The sting suits are made from Lycra, and the Aussies say
that they block most stingers. Sting suits may also help to reduce sun exposure,
though they may also increase the chances of chafing. Apply BodyGlide,

--- Page 178 Text ---
Vaseline, or another type of lubrication to the inseams and areas of the garment
that may cause chafing, especially around the neck.
Some swimmers may opt to wear a nylon-rubber dive skin, but if you are
swimming in warm waters, make sure that you do not become overheated, and
drink sufficient fluids to avoid dehydration.
There is also a jellyfish sting protective lotion, Safe Sea (see Sources for
website address; this page), with and without sun block, with a barrier cream that
blocks or diminishes the stings of many jellyfish species.
Treatment for Jellyfish Stings
The physical reaction to jellyfish stings depends on the species of jellyfish and
on a swimmer’s sensitivity to the stings. The most immediate danger is an acute,
severe allergic reaction: A mild allergic response of itching and skin hives can
suddenly transform into anaphylactic shock, which includes a substantial drop in
blood pressure, facial and airway swelling, difficulty breathing, collapse, and
sometimes death.
Most beach lifeguards and surf lifesavers are aware of the species of jellyfish
in their area and know how to treat these stings. However, this is not always the
case. On a warm summer day a few years ago, my friend Martha was off the
shores of Martha’s Vineyard and swam into a jellyfish that wrapped its tentacles
around her arms, injecting venom from its stinging cells into her skin and
causing extreme pain. Martha managed to climb out of the water and walk to the
lifeguard station, where she asked the lifeguards to treat her stings.
Unfortunately, they didn’t know what to do and did not have any remedies. She
took a hot shower, which increased her pain.
There are differing opinions or controversy about the most effective
treatments for jellyfish stings. This situation became clear when Sandy from
California was swimming a long distance off Hawaii. She was stung by a man-
of-war. She said it was very painful, but she was only halfway through her swim
and didn’t want to stop. Her crew told her that the best treatment for the jellyfish
stings was uric acid, which would supposedly break down the jellyfish’s stinging
cells and reduce her pain. One of the men on board her support boat offered to
urinate on her arms. It should be noted that urine is not composed of uric acid;
furthermore, it has never been shown to be an effective topical remedy for
jellyfish stings. She accepted the treatment, but it was extremely difficult to
apply the liquid. She was bobbing up and down in the water, and he was rocking
back and forth on the boat, attempting to urinate on her. Somehow he managed
to hit the target with undiluted urine. However, the pain didn’t diminish, and she

--- Page 179 Text ---
decided to continue swimming—until another man-of-war zapped her across the
face. Her friend immediately offered his help again, but she wisely declined and
climbed out of the water.
Some people claim that jellyfish toxins can build up in the body if a swimmer
is stung multiple times. This is unproved. It is possible that a person who is
repetitively stung over a period of a few hours might retain toxin that circulates
in the bloodstream. An allergic reaction may be immediate or slightly delayed,
and there are different allergic reactions that confuse the picture. A mild allergic
reaction can be a warning that the situation might soon deteriorate, so the victim
should be watched closely until there is a clear trend toward improvement.
Topical lidocaine 4 percent also may effectively numb a jellyfish sting but
may not lessen the envenomation.
Dr. Paul Auerbach wrote that, depending on the species, size, geographic
location, time of year, and other natural factors, the toxins in the jellyfish’s
stinging cells can cause stings that range in severity from a mild burning
sensation and redness around the sting sites to excruciating pain and severe
blistering of the skin. The stings can cause nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath,
and muscle spasms. Jellyfish toxins affect people differently, and treatment for
one jellyfish species may work well for that species but may not be effective for
another species. The treatment for the Atlantic man-of-war jellyfish, for
example, is different from the treatment for the man-of-war jellyfish off the
shores of Hawaii.

--- Page 180 Text ---
BOX JELLYFISH
Box jellyfish belong to the class Cuboazoa. They are cube-or umbrella-shaped,
and differ from the true jellyfish, Scyphozoa, which are dome-or crown-shaped.
Many box jellyfish are transparent and pale blue, making them difficult to see in
the water. They do not simply pulsate and drift through the water column, as do
“true” jellyfish, to find food. Box jellyfish are believed to hunt their prey and are
among the most venomous animals in the world. Stings from Chironex fleckeri,
Carukia barnesi, and Malo kingi are extremely painful. A sting from Chironex
fleckeri may cause death in a matter of minutes from shock, cessation of
breathing, and abnormal heart rhythms.
Chironex fleckeri, Carukia barnesi, and Malo kingi are largely found off
northern Australia and the tropical Indo-Pacific Ocean. Other species of box
jellyfish are found in tropical and subtropical oceans, including the subtropical
and tropical waters of the Atlantic Ocean and east Pacific Ocean, with some
species found as far north as California, the Mediterranean, Japan, South Africa,
and New Zealand.
Australians have discovered that the species Chironex fleckeri is particularly
dangerous during the wet season, from roughly November to April off northern
Australia. This box jellyfish is the largest in the species, measuring up to about
one foot, or thirty centimeters, in diameter, with tentacles that stretch up to nine
feet, or three meters, long. Carukia barnesi, the other dangerous species of box
jellyfish, is tiny, the size of a thumbnail, and also found in waters off Australia. It
is commonly known as Irukandji. Stings from this species cause muscle spasm,
nausea and vomiting, sweating, high blood pressure, and sometimes death.
Treatment for Box Jellyfish Stings
Dr. Auerbach recommended the following treatment for a sting from Chironex
fleckeri, the box jellyfish:
~ Immediately pour vinegar (5 percent acetic acid) over the sting sites.
~ Keep the swimmer as still as possible, and continue saturating the sting area with vinegar, until a
physician attends to the person.
~ If you are out at sea or on an isolated shore, let the vinegar remain on the skin and tentacles for
ten minutes to attain its full neutralizing effect. Then remove the tentacles with tweezers.
Lifeguards in Australia are qualified to give an intramuscular injection of
antivenom to the sting victim on-site if needed.

--- Page 181 Text ---
Treatment for Pacific and Atlantic Man-of-War
Dr. Auerbach recommended the following treatment for stings from any
Portuguese man-of-war (Atlantic version or Pacific version: “bluebottle”),
Irukandji, fire coral, stinging hydroid, sea nettle, or sea anemone: Use vinegar or
rubbing alcohol to saturate the skin, or apply soaked compresses. Some
authorities advise against using alcohol because it has not been proved effective
beyond a doubt; however, many people believe it is a good alternative to vinegar.
For some jellyfish stings, people have found household ammonia or a slurry of
baking soda to be effective. Different species of jellyfish carry different toxins
and produce different reactions to their stings. It is extremely important to know
ahead of time what will work for the stings in the area where you are swimming.
If a topical decontaminant, such as vinegar, is not available, then rinse the skin
with seawater. Do not rinse the skin with fresh water, and do not apply ice
directly to the skin. This may cause more stinging cells to discharge and worsen
the stings. Experts recommend using a forceful shower of salt water to remove
the microscopic stinging cells; a gentle shower is more likely to cause the cells
to discharge, worsening the stings. A cold pack may diminish pain, but wipe off
any surface moisture before applying it. Some Australians also use hot but not
scalding water applied to the sting site, or hot-water immersion for the
Australian species of Portuguese man-of-war. The hot-water treatment for
jellyfish stings in North America has not been proved so should not be assumed
to be effective. Remember, application of cool fresh water worsens certain
stings.
Apply soaks of vinegar or rubbing alcohol for thirty minutes or until pain is
relieved. Baking soda powder or paste is recommended to detoxify the sting of
certain sea nettles, such as the Chesapeake Bay sea nettle. If these
decontaminants are not available, apply soaks of diluted (quarter-strength)
household ammonia. A paste made from unseasoned meat tenderizer (do not
exceed fifteen minutes of application time, particularly on the sensitive skin of
small children) or papaya fruit may be helpful. These contain papain, which may
alleviate the sting from the thimble jellyfish that causes seabather’s eruption. Do
not apply any organic solvent, such as kerosene, turpentine, or gasoline. While
likely not harmful, urine has never been proved to be effective.
After decontamination, apply a lather of shaving cream or soap and shave the
affected area with a razor. In a pinch, you can use a paste of sand or mud in
seawater and a clamshell.
Reapply the vinegar or rubbing alcohol soak for fifteen minutes.
Apply a thin coating of hydrocortisone lotion (0.5 to 1 percent) twice a day.

--- Page 182 Text ---
Anesthetic ointment (such as lidocaine hydrochloride 2.5 percent, or a
benzocaine-containing spray) may provide short-term pain relief.
If the victim has a large area involved (an entire arm or leg, face, or genitals),
is very young or very old, or shows signs of generalized illness (nausea,
vomiting, weakness, shortness of breath, or chest pain), seek help from a doctor.
If a child has placed tentacle fragments in his mouth, have him swish and spit
whatever potable liquid is available. If there is already swelling in the mouth
(muffled voice, difficulty swallowing, enlarged tongue and lips), do not give
anything by mouth, protect the airway, and rapidly transport the victim to a
hospital. Note: Protecting the airway is done by intubating the victim.
Anaphylaxis can set in (quickly), and once the airway is swollen shut, you
cannot get it open unless you cut (cricotomy). A jellyfish sting in the mouth is
dangerous due to the swelling in the airway. ABCs (airway, breathing,
circulation) must be monitored quickly. The EMT/paramedic may forgo any
risks and intubate, even if the patient is conscious.
Treatment for Hawaii Man-of-War Species
Rinse the area liberally with seawater or fresh water to remove any tentacles
stuck to the skin. This can be from a spray bottle or in a beach shower. Do not
apply vinegar.
For severe pain, try applying heat or cold—whichever feels better to the
victim.
Few Portuguese man-of-war stings in Hawaii cause a life-threatening reaction,
but it is always a possibility. Some people are extremely sensitive to the venom;
a few have allergic reactions. You should consider even the slightest difficulty
breathing, or altered level of consciousness, to be a medical emergency. If a
severe allergic reaction is suspected or diagnosed, call for help and use an
automatic epinephrine injector, if available, and if someone is qualified to
administer the injection.
This differs from the advice offered by Dr. Auerbach. Some of the
lifeguards cite a study showing that vinegar sometimes makes the sting
worse. Portuguese man-of-wars belong to a different family than box
jellyfish [Carybdea alata] and therefore must be treated separately. It is a
personal choice whether or not to use vinegar to treat Pacific man-of-war
stings.

--- Page 183 Text ---
LEPTOSPIROSIS
Leptospirosis is caused by the Leptospira spirochete. It’s a problem worldwide
in bodies of fresh and salt water. Leptospirosis can be carried by many animals,
such as rats, skunks, opossums, raccoons, foxes, and other vermin. It is
transmitted when people come in contact with infected soil or water
(contaminated with the waste products of an infected animal). People contract
the disease by either eating contaminated food or water or through cuts and via
the eyes, nose, and mouth if they come in contact with the contaminated water or
soil.
Leptospirosis occurs in fresh and salt water all over the world, but it is most
common in the tropics. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
states that there are between one and two hundred cases of leptospirosis reported
each year in the United States, with about 50 percent of cases occurring in
Hawaii.
Medical experts describe flulike symptoms, headaches, muscle aches, eye
pain, and red eyes, followed by chills and fever. By the fifth or sixth day, the
second phase of the illness begins, with fever and aching, stiffness of the neck,
and serious inflammation of the nerves to the eyes, brain, spinal column, and
other structures. Right upper-quadrant abdominal pain may occur.
Dr. Laura King said that:
~ The treatment of non-severe cases is with oral doxycycline or tetracycline.
~ The treatment for serious cases is intravenous penicillin G or third-generation cephalosporins.
SEABATHER’S ERUPTION
Seabather’s eruption on the skin is caused by stinging cells from the thimble
jellyfish, such as Linuche unguiculata, and the larval forms of certain sea
anemones, such as Edwardsiella lineata. Swimmers may feel tingling sensations
on exposed skin or beneath a swimsuit while they are swimming. The stings
from these tiny sea animals cause a rash accompanied by intense itching and
pain. Dr. Auerbach noted that most first remedies are not very satisfying.
Vinegar or rubbing alcohol can be used, but neither is very effective.
Unseasoned meat tenderizer (papain) may help the initial decontamination,
followed by an application of calamine lotion to soothe the skin. The swimmer
should treat the skin with a topical decontaminant before taking a bath or

--- Page 184 Text ---
shower; otherwise, the fresh water will likely make the reaction worse. After
decontaminating and thoroughly washing your skin with soap and water, try
applying a topical steroid preparation.
The sting cells remain within the swimsuit and continue to cause a problem,
so the swimsuit needs to be washed in a machine on a full cycle or rinsed with
vinegar or alcohol and then washed with soap and water, taking care to wear
rubber dishwashing gloves.
To prevent seabather’s eruption, you may want to wear the stinger suit that
many Australians use, or a dive skin, but don’t overheat and be sure to keep up
with your hydration needs. If you wear a garment in the water, prevent chafing
by applying a lubricant such as Vaseline, Aquaphor, or BodyGlide. Safe Sea may
help block seabather’s eruption and is available with or without sun block.
Because any topical preparation washes off in the water, reapply it according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

--- Page 185 Text ---
SEA CUCUMBERS
Sea cucumbers are cucumber-shaped sea animals that may produce a liquid
called holothurin, which causes skin and eye irritation. They range in size from
half an inch up to sixteen feet. They look like they would be soft, but their top
skin covers many microscopic pieces of skeleton called spicules. Most sea
cucumbers live on the sea floor or dig themselves into soft mud or sand. They
also live in underwater rock crevices and on the underside of stones and boulders
and some sea cucumbers can swim.
It is simply best not to handle them. If swimmers get holothurin in their eyes,
Dr. Auerbach recommends irrigating the eyes with at least a quart of disinfected
water and seeking immediate medical attention. If the victim is out at sea, treat
the eye injury as a corneal abrasion—by instilling ophthalmic antibiotic drops or
ointment.

--- Page 186 Text ---
SEA URCHIN
Sea urchins are round-to-flattened bodies with hard shells covered with spines
ranging from approximately half an inch to many inches long. The spines serve
as protection from predators such as sea otters, wolf eels, and other fish. Sea
urchins inhabit all the world’s oceans and live in shallow sandy water, rocky
areas, and around kelp beds. They vary in size from one and a half inches to
about four inches and resemble pincushions, some with short spines (merely an
inch long), others with sharp spines over three inches long. They are often green,
black, purple, brown, red, and light orange.
Divers hunt for sea urchins for their roe. They usually find them moving
slowly with their articulating spines and on tubed feet as they feed on algae and
detritus. When you’re swimming above, they are beautiful to watch; if their
spines are long, they move in the direction of the underwater current. Sea
urchins are a favorite food of wolf eel, triggerfish, and sea otters.
The problem is when people mishandle or step on them. The urchin spines
that are sharp usually contain venom and can puncture or break beneath the skin.
Some types of urchins can grasp the swimmer with small appendages called
pedicellaria, which are also venom bearing. Any envenomation can cause severe
pain, muscle spasm, or in the case of multiple punctures, difficulty breathing,
weakness, low blood pressure, and collapse.
Most commonly, spines become embedded and cause problems as foreign
bodies within the soft tissues, leading to inflammation, occasional infection, and
complications, such as nerve irritation or arthritis.
Sea Urchin Treatment
Dr. Auerbach and other medical experts recommend the following treatment:
If the injured person is having difficulty breathing and suffering from
tightness in the chest, he should go immediately to an emergency department or
other qualified medical facility. Otherwise, immerse the wound in nonscalding
hot water to tolerance (see the recommendations for scorpion fish, below) for
thirty to ninety minutes. Maintain the water temperature by adding more hot
water as needed. The hot-water treatment usually reduces pain. Take pain
medications as appropriate.
Carefully use tweezers and remove easily extracted visible spines. Do not dig
in to the soft tissues, which may cause the spines to become fragmented and

--- Page 187 Text ---
make them more difficult to remove. If you see purple or black markings in the
skin immediately after it has been penetrated by the spines, that does not always
indicate there are spines retained in the skin. The discoloration may be caused by
pigment that has leached from the spine(s) into the tissues. The dye will usually
be absorbed over a day or two, and the discoloration will then disappear. If there
are still black markings after forty-eight to seventy-two hours, a spine fragment
is likely present.
If the sting is caused by a species of sea urchin with pincer organs, remove the
pedicellaria—the urchins’ seizing organs between the spines—by applying
shaving cream or a paste of soap and then shaving the affected area, gently
scraping with the razor. Scrub the puncture area with soap and water, and flush
repeatedly with disinfected fresh water. Treat the wounds with a very light
application of antiseptic ointment and dressing.
If the spines are in swimmers’ hands or feet, or near joints, they may need to
be removed surgically to reduce infection, inflammation, and possible damage to
nerves or important blood vessels.
If the wound shows signs of infection (increasing redness, fever, pus, and/or
swollen lymph glands within twenty-four to forty-eight hours after the injury) or
if the spine is felt to have penetrated into a joint, a physician may want to start
the victim on an antibiotic to oppose Vibrio bacteria. Suggested antibiotics are
ciprofloxacin, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim, doxycycline, or tetracycline, as
well as an antibiotic to oppose Staphylococcus bacteria (for example,
dicloxacillin or cephalexin).
If a spine puncture in the palm of the hand results in a persistent swollen
finger without any sign of infection—namely, fever, redness, or swollen lymph
glands in the elbow or armpit—it may be necessary to seek medical treatment. It
is possible that there is a retained spine or fragments that have inflamed a
tendon, ligament, or soft tissue.

--- Page 188 Text ---
SEAWEED DERMATITIS
Off the shores of Hawaii and Florida is a blue-green algae, Microcoleus
lyngbyaceus, that slips inside swimsuits. The algae irritates the skin, making it
red and itchy, and sometimes it blisters. This reaction may occur just after the
swimmer leaves the water.
~ Remove your swimsuit, scrub the skin with soap and water, and rinse with rubbing alcohol.
~ If the reaction is severe, consult a physician.
~ Wash the swimsuit thoroughly.

--- Page 189 Text ---
SCORPION FISH
It’s simple—don’t touch scorpion fish, and watch where you step. Scorpaenidae,
the scorpion fish, is a fish family that includes: zebra fish, lionfish, turkey fish,
and scorpion fish. They live in the tropical and temperate seas and are found in
the Red Sea, the Caribbean Sea, and the Indo-Pacific Ocean. Shared features of
the scorpion fish family are: highly compressed body, large mouth, spines on the
head, the gills, and the dorsal and pectoral fins, and they can camouflage
themselves by changing colors to match their environment. Sometimes they
resemble pieces of coral or rock. Changing colors helps them hunt prey and
defend themselves. They usually inhabit the shallow waters, but some species
reside at a depth of 7,200 feet. They are solitary in nature and live in caves,
crevices, and among the coral reefs.
Scorpion fish have dorsal, anal, and pelvic spines that transport venom from
glands into puncture wounds. If a person is stung by a scorpion fish, depending
on the species, the wound may be extremely painful, swollen, pale, blistered, or
discolored, and accompanied by abdominal pain, shortness of breath, and more
severe systemic symptoms. A sting from a scorpion fish may be life threatening.
The treatment for a scorpion fish sting is to immerse the injured area in water
as hot as the person can tolerate for thirty to ninety minutes, taking care not to
cause a scald injury; always test the hot water on an uninjured part of the body
first. The hot water will decrease the swimmer’s pain substantially if the sting
was from a lionfish. It will have less effect on a scorpion fish sting and little
effect on a stonefish sting. Whether or not the pain is diminished, the immersion
treatment should be performed, because the heat may decrease the effects of the
harmful proteins contained in the venom. Dr. Auerbach noted:
~ Seek immediate medical attention if the victim appears intoxicated or is weak, vomiting, short of
breath, or unconscious.
~ It may be necessary for a physician to treat not only the wound but any ensuing infection.
~ There is now antivenom for stonefish. If stung by a stonefish, seek immediate medical attention.

--- Page 190 Text ---
CROWN-OF-THORNS STARFISH
Starfish, or sea stars, are echinoderms, and they belong to the class Asteroidea.
There are about eighteen hundred species of starfish that occur in the world’s
oceans, including the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Arctic, and Southern Ocean
Antarctic regions. They live at a range of depths, from the intertidal waters down
to abyssal depths of up to six thousand meters. The species vary greatly in size,
color, and shape: from the pink starfish to the bright blue starfish and the bat
starfish, whose appendages are shaped like bat wings.
The starfish that poses a threat to the environment and swimmers is the
crown-of-thorns starfish (Acanthaster planci). They are predators of coral reefs.
An individual starfish can consume up to sixty-five square feet of living coral
reef per year. They are beautiful vibrant-colored starfish with sharp spines on
their appendages, up to three inches long, that give them a crownlike shape.
They measure about ten inches and are found in tropical oceans around the
world. They are dangerous to humans; do not touch them.
The crown-of-thorns starfish produces a neurotoxin that is released through its
sharp spines and can easily puncture wet suits and divers’ gloves. Wounds from
the starfish can be serious, and the neurotoxin can cause a sharp stinging pain
that may last for hours, as well as nausea, vomiting, brief muscle paralysis, and
swollen glands. The area around the wound often turns dark blue and begins to
swell. The swelling may continue for many weeks.
The treatment is similar to that for a sea urchin puncture: Immerse the wound
in nonscalding hot water, as hot as the swimmer can tolerate, for thirty to ninety
minutes. This frequently provides pain relief.
~ The swimmer may want to take appropriate over-the-counter pain medicine, like ibuprofen.
~ Carefully remove any spines with tweezers.
~ If spines or fragments of spines remain in the wound, seek the assistance of a physician.

--- Page 191 Text ---
STONEFISH
The Australian Aborigines perform an ancient dance in which a man wades into
a tidal pool to hunt for fish. He suddenly steps on something and screams from
the pain. The dancer writhes on the ground, and the dance ends with a death
song. The stonefish dance is meant to educate the young Aborigines about the
dangers of stonefish, the deadliest fish in the world.
Stonefish, a genus of fish of the family Synanceiidae, inhabit the Indo-Pacific
and northern Australian waters and grow to be up to twelve inches long. They
are found in exposed sand and mud tidal inlets to depths of about 120 feet. They
are mottled brownish green and perfectly camouflaged to look like kelp-covered
rocks. When disturbed or threatened, they stick up their thirteen dorsal spines,
and glands along their back project venom into the spines. Stonefish are armed
this way against predatory sharks and rays, but they also present great danger to
swimmers.
The stonefish sting causes excruciating pain, rapid swelling, and tissue death.
The severity of the sting and symptoms depends on the depth of penetration and
the number of spines involved. The venom can cause muscle weakness,
temporary paralysis, and shock, which may result in death if not treated.
Fatalities have occurred in the Indo-Pacific region, though not in Australian
waters.
If stung:
~ Bathing or immersing the sting in hot water may reduce the pain.
~ Transport the patient to the nearest hospital.

--- Page 192 Text ---
STINGRAYS
Stingrays are found in coastal tropical and subtropical marine waters throughout
the world, and there are some species that inhabit temperate oceans, deep
oceans, and rivers. Stingrays are a group of rays that are cartilaginous fish
related to sharks. Most stingrays have one or multiple barbed stingers on their
tails. The barb is about two inches long, and its underside has two grooves with
venom glands. The stinger is covered with a thin layer of skin, the integumentary
sheath, in which the venom is concentrated. Stingrays do not aggressively attack
humans; usually, stings occur only if a ray is accidentally stepped on. To avoid
stepping on a stingray, lifeguards advise shuffling your feet when you are
entering and exiting the water.
If you’re stung, seek assistance from a beach lifeguard. If you begin to feel
tightness in the chest, swelling anywhere on your face, difficulty breathing, hives
anywhere on your body, or nausea, you are having an allergic reaction! Get to an
emergency room immediately! Allergic reactions can be minor to severe, so any
abnormal reactions besides occasional itching, minor swelling at the sting site, or
pain should be seen by a doctor.
~ If in doubt, always seek medical attention, especially if the wound becomes inflamed or
infection does not subside after a few days of at-home treatment.
~ People with compromised immune systems need to seek immediate medical treatment.
~ Place the area that was stung in a bucket of very hot water to denature (break down the stingray
venom).
~ After the pain has diminished, use topical antibiotics such as Neosporin or Bactine.
~ The wound may be bandaged. Make sure it does not reduce circulation to the area.
~ Check the wound for infection.

--- Page 193 Text ---
COUNTRY MEDICINE
Years ago, Don Nelson, a marine biologist from California State University,
Long Beach, told me that meat tenderizer was an effective treatment for jellyfish
stings. It has a papaya enzyme that breaks down the protein of nematocyst, the
stinging cell that that jellyfish inject into skin when a swimmer brushes against
the tentacles.
The origin for this wisdom may have come from the people living in
Micronesia. Cindy Hunter, my biologist friend who conducts research on coral
reefs, was diving off some of the Micronesian Islands, where there are many
species of jellyfish. The local people told her that when they were stung, they
placed papaya skins on the sting sites.
Recently, two friends, Sandy and Janice, were doing a training swim off
Corona del Mar, California. Janice was stung. Sandy had some meat tenderizer
in her car and rubbed it on Janice’s wound, then gave her a couple of Advils
while they waited for the lifeguards to transport her to the lifeguard station. By
the time they immersed her foot in hot water, the meat tenderizer had done its
job, and the pain had pretty much disappeared.
Dr. Auerbach added, “One must take care to not leave meat tenderizer on
sensitive skin for too long, no longer than ten to fifteen minutes, because it can
cause an irritating reaction in and of itself. Furthermore, I have heard from a few
users that if the seasoned form of tenderizer is used, it may increase the irritation
or even cause stinging. The sensitive skin of infants and babies, and facial skin at
all ages, may be more prone to an adverse skin irritation from application of
papain. I have heard of using fresh papaya fruit. I don’t know anything about the
use of pineapple.”
SWIMMER’S ITCH
Swimmer’s itch (also known as duck itch, lake itch, cercarial dermatitis, and
Schistosome cercarial dermatitis) is a short-term immune response that happens
when a swimmer’s skin has been infected by a waterborne flatworm called
schistosomatidae. These parasites live in fresh water and salt water and use
freshwater snails or waterfowl as their hosts (that may be the origin of the term
“duck itch”).
Swimmer’s itch occurs when the flatworm releases microscopic cercariae into
the water and they penetrate the swimmer’s skin. The cercariae immediately die

--- Page 194 Text ---
and cause an immune reaction beginning as mild itchy spots that may worsen.
This occurs mostly in summer and was diagnosed first in Lake Michigan.
The symptoms are itchy raised papules within a few hours of the infection, but
they are usually gone within a week. I wish I’d known before I began training in
Lake Titicaca, Bolivia. After my first day of training, I broke out all over my
body in pink welts about the size of quarters. They itched mildly at first, and
then the itching intensified. I was driving Pete Kelly, my crew member, nuts with
my scratching. Pete, who spoke fluent Spanish, tried his best to find out what
was causing the welts. On the street in Copacabana, he stopped a local woman
and showed her the bumps on my neck. She gave us a horrified look, quickly
made the sign of the cross, and turned and ran away, as if I had bubonic plague.
Not to be deterred, Pete continued his search and found a local pharmacist
who told him that in the jungles of South America, the native Indians used
something called violetta, the juice from the fruit of an indigenous plant, to stop
the itch of mosquito bites. Pete thought violetta might help me stop itching.
The pharmacist had some on hand in a small bottle, and I applied the solution
liberally to the welts. It turned them deep purple but did not do anything to
diminish the itch. Pete encouraged me to continue applying it, for lack of
anything better to do. Soon my body was covered by itchy pink and purple polka
dots. And red polka dots where the dots blistered. In a week, they went away on
their own.
We never noticed any freshwater snails in the water or waterfowl swimming
around the lake, just small groups of brown and white cows that stood like
statues, ankle-deep in the water, and slowly turned their heads from left to right
and back as I swam past.
When I arrived home and Dr. King noticed the welts on my skin, she said I
probably had swimmer’s itch. It was a relief to know that it wasn’t a strange
disease, and it helped to know how to treat it. Most people think that swimmer’s
itch only occurs in freshwater lakes, but Dr. King says it can happen in salt
water, too. Dr. King and Dr. Auerbach recommend the following treatment:
Rinse the skin with rubbing alcohol and coat it with calamine or Caladryl lotion.
Additional treatments include baking soda or oatmeal baths. Topical steroid
creams help reduce the itching. If the reaction is severe, you should see a
physician. Cercariae are found in greatest concentrations in warm shallow waters
and in areas where there are long grasses that serve as home to the snails. Simply
avoid swimming in these areas.
SEALS RECOMMEND U.S. NAVY DIVE MANUAL

--- Page 195 Text ---
Above are some of the more dangerous marine animals that swimmers may
encounter, but there are many other dangerous marine animals, and it is worth
thoroughly researching any area before you swim.
The SEALs use the U.S. Navy Dive Manual, which can be downloaded for
free from the Internet (see Sources for website address; this page). They
recommend Revision 6, volume 5, appendices 5B and 5C, which cover diving
first aid and dangerous marine life, respectively.

--- Page 196 Text ---
Sharks
A friend once suggested that I attempt a swim across Lake Nicaragua. He
explained that it was the largest lake in Central America, bordered by the Pacific
Ocean on the west and the Caribbean Sea on the east and connected by the San
Juan River to the Caribbean Sea. It sounded interesting, and all the tourist
brochures touted great tarpon fishing, which made me think that it would be
fairly easy to find an escort boat for the swim.
When I mentioned the idea to Laura, my sister who coached at Alamo Area
Aquatic Association in San Antonio, Texas, she said she would check with
Solomon Soza, a friend who coached with her and had grown up in Central
America.
Solomon had seen tourist brochures about Lake Nicaragua or, as it was known
in Spanish, Mar Dulce (“The Sweet Sea”). Brochures touted the beauty of the
lake, but after he checked with friends who had been to the area, he discovered
that Lake Nicaragua was anything but fresh; it was seriously polluted by sewage.
In 1981 thirty-two tons (seventy thousand pounds) of raw sewage was being
released into Lake Nicaragua daily, and the industries along the shore had been
dumping chemicals and other pollutants in it for a long time.
More than that, Solomon said that there was a large population of sharks
living in the lake. My first thought was that Solomon was joking; I had never
heard of freshwater sharks. I checked with another friend, Bob Gelbard, who had
been the assistant secretary of state for Latin America, and was a swimmer and

--- OCR from Page 196 Image 1 ---
Chapter 14
a

--- Page 197 Text ---
diver. Bob confirmed that there were bull sharks in Lake Nicaragua and it was
dangerous to swim there. People had been attacked by the sharks and also by
sawfish. Bob explained that sawfish live in tropical and subtropical areas in the
Atlantic and Indo-Pacific, in coastal waters, estuaries, bays, rivers, and lakes.
They inhabit shallow murky waters and can move back and forth between salt
and fresh water. Sawfish are usually light gray or brown and are related to sharks
and rays, though they have more of a shark-shaped body, with a very long snout
called a rostrum. The rostrum has sharp “teeth” called denticles, and the sawfish
uses it like a saw.
The rostrum is equipped with electroreceptor and motion sensors that can
sense the heartbeats and movements of prawns, crabs, and other fish hiding in
the mud. They rake the mud with their rostrum to uncover prey hiding in mud,
and they use it to slash fast-swimming prey. The species that inhabits Lake
Nicaragua, the large-tooth sawfish, can grow up to twenty feet long and weigh
up to one thousand pounds. They sleep during the day and fish at night. They are
not known to attack humans unless provoked or surprised.
I did not want to give up on the idea of swimming across Lake Nicaragua. I
thought there might be areas of the lake where the water was not as polluted, and
a way to avoid annoying the sawfish. I checked with my friend Don Nelson, the
researcher at California State University, Long Beach. He confirmed that the bull
sharks in Lake Nicaragua were especially interesting because they were able to
jump over the rapids of the San Juan River and swim between Lake Nicaragua
and the Caribbean Sea. He noted that bull sharks were particularly aggressive,
and he did not advise swimming in the lake.
Don knew about aggressive sharks. He had spent much of his career studying
gray reef sharks in Tahiti and around Enewetak Atol with Richard Johnson,
another shark expert. The reef sharks were between four and five feet long. Don
said they noticed that if they swam too close to a gray reef shark or if they made
fast, startling movements, the shark would swim in an exaggerated manner,
wagging its head and tail from side to side. It would point its pectoral fins (the
fins on the underside of its body) downward, lift its snout, arch its back, and
sometimes swim in a rolling or spiraling motion. Don said that if a shark was
cornered, its behavior became more aggressive, though this was not unusual
behavior for any cornered animal.
Don said he got too close to one four-or five-foot-long shark, and it bit his
arm. Don’s eyes lit up when he talked about the speed with which the shark
struck. Fortunately, he was wearing Kevlar for protection, so he wasn’t badly
hurt. The experience didn’t dampen his fascination with sharks.
When I would call and tell him that I was thinking about swimming in a

--- Page 198 Text ---
certain waterway, he’d open his encyclopedia that showed the waterways of the
world, and the species of sharks that inhabited them, and describe in wonderful
detail the species in the waters, how big they grew, and how they behaved. He
told me about all species of sharks, including pygmy sharks that were eight to
ten inches in length, with photophores that produced bioluminescent light on
their undersides. The photophores were used for protective “counter shading”
camouflage, to make them less visible against the lighter background at the
surface.
One of my favorites was the Wobbegong shark, a three-or four-foot-long shark
that lives in the shallow waters off Australia. Their bodies are camouflaged with
a symmetrical pattern of bold markings that resemble a carpet, so Wobbegongs
are often known as carpet sharks. The small whisker lobes surrounding the jaw
are used to attract and catch fish. They are relatively invisible around rocky
shores. They don’t attack swimmers or divers but will bite if harassed or stepped
on.
Don’s enthusiasm for sharks was contagious. He said that of the 360 species
of sharks, only four—the great white, oceanic whitetip, tiger, and bull sharks—
are threatening to humans. Although all four are large, powerful predators
known to have attacked and killed people, they have been filmed without the
photographer using a cage for protection.
Once when I was speaking, I met a woman at the University of Hawaii who
loved swimming in the open water. Sharks were her family’s aumakua. She
explained that aumakua are deified ancestor guardians that watch over members
of a native Hawaiian’s clan. Different clans have different animals. Sharks are
the most popular aumakua, but sea turtles are as well.
Because sharks were her family’s guardians, she always felt safe when she
swam offshore. She mentioned that she and her brother went fishing one time off
Oahu. They had been out five hours, and the tropical sun was very hot, so she
told her brother to stop fishing. She wanted to jump into the water and swim.
Within minutes her brother saw a large shark fin moving toward her. He
thought it was a tiger shark, maybe twelve feet long. He shouted and tried to
move the boat to her before the shark got too close. But there wasn’t time.
She saw the shark swimming toward her and around her, but she was not
afraid. She talked to the shark, and it eventually swam away. She knew of
members of her clan who kept a hammerhead shark as a pet. They fed it and
petted it like a dog. Having a shark as a pet was part of her clan’s tradition.
Who knows what sharks sense and how bonds are created between sharks and
humans. This was something new to me but not to Eugenie Clark, a renowned
expert in shark research who developed one of the first shark repellents from a

--- Page 199 Text ---
fish called the Moses sole. The Moses sole emits a substance that has the same
chemistry as soap. Eugenie tied the Moses sole with a string and lowered it into
the water, and the sharks swam toward the sole, then turned away. They ate other
species of fish, but the Moses sole always remained untouched. Don Nelson said
it was a promising repellent, but in order for it to work, you had to squirt the
substance the shark’s mouth. Sharks didn’t like their mouths washed out with
soap.
Before going snorkeling in the Caribbean, I asked Eugenie Clark for advice.
“It’s a rare opportunity to see sharks. When else could you observe sharks in the
wild?” Maybe if I observed them in their natural surroundings, I thought, I
would understand them better and be less afraid. The divemaster off Walker’s
Cay tossed frozen bait into the water. It sank to the shallow ocean floor. With
one of the crew members, I jumped in the water to watch Caribbean reef sharks,
four to five feet long, swim in and feed off the chum. They were fairly shy and
stayed at least ten feet away. A seven-or eight-foot bull shark swam right below
us, focusing on the chum but only three feet away. I kept hearing Don Nelson’s
voice in my head: “Bull sharks can be very dangerous. You want to avoid bull
sharks.”
Other sharks swam in to feed off the chum, and another bull shark, this one six
or seven feet, joined the dinner party. It was amazing to watch them swim and
feed, and I did gain a greater appreciation of them, but I never felt comfortable.
Don gave me some general guidelines about swimming anywhere in the
ocean:
~ Before swimming in any waterway, check with the local beach lifeguard, coast guard,
divemasters, or harbormaster to find out if there is a shark problem.
~ Don’t wear a swimsuit lined with metallic material or wear jewelry. Shiny metal attracts
attention from sharks and barracuda.
~ In areas where there are seals and sea lions, don’t wear black swimsuits. These animals are the
primary food source for great white sharks, and it is not good to resemble food.
~ Seals, sea lions, elephant seals, and sea turtles are the primary food source for some large sharks,
such as great whites. It is not good to swim in a feeding area. Avoid rookeries or places where there
are high concentrations of these marine mammals. A swimmer could be mistaken for food.
~ “When in doubt, get out” is my motto. If you are swimming in an area in which you don’t feel
comfortable, get out of the water.
According to John McCosker, formerly the director of the Steinhart Aquarium
and currently the senior scientist and chair of the California Academy of
Sciences in San Francisco, “The danger of shark attack in California waters is
minuscule; however, should one have that experience, it can be a very serious
and most unforgettable event. Only ninety-nine unprovoked attacks by sharks

--- Page 200 Text ---
(all or nearly all involving the white shark, Carcharodon carcharias), resulting
in nine fatalities, have occurred in California history. An average of 1.8 attacks
per year have occurred in California during the last decade, which is far fewer
than the numerous drownings, bee stings, and lightning strikes that cause
fatalities each year.”

--- Page 201 Text ---
SWIMMING WITH SHARKS AND RAYS
Christopher Lowe, PhD, is a professor in the Department of Biological Sciences
at California State University, Long Beach, and at one point during his career, he
studied with Don Nelson. Dr. Lowe is one of the world’s foremost experts on
sharks. He grew up on Martha’s Vineyard and spent hours swimming and fishing
offshore. His favorite catch was sharks. He said that they come in so many
different shapes and sizes that it is hard to sum them up in a single description.
He said, “The lovable horn shark always reminds me of a puppy. They have
large pectoral fins, big old horned dorsal fins, and that funny punched-in nose.
Watching them eat sea urchins always cracks me up. It’s like watching a puppy
trying to eat a bug for the first time. Not many people would use the word ‘cute’
and ‘shark’ in the same sentence, but how can you not when you see a horn
shark? And the regal silvertip shark is by far one of my favorite tropical reef
sharks. With their sleek lines and dapper silver-tipped fins, they epitomize poise
and grace. Having worked with some many species over the years, I find it
interesting how each species has a unique personality. They are all amazingly
strong and can move incredibly fast when needed.”
While many people dread the thought of swimming with sharks, Dr. Lowe
seeks them out. He said, “I’ve had the wonderful opportunity to swim and dive
with a lot of different species of sharks. Most of the encounters were intentional
—I was out looking for them. I can remember seeing a large tiger shark in the
water at Midway Atoll and swimming as hard as I could to take a picture of it,
but it leisurely swam away from me, leaving me behind with the plankton! I’ve
never seen a white shark while swimming or diving. With all the time I’ve spent
in the water off California, I’m certain a few have cruised by me and I didn’t
even know it. But that is the predator’s gift—the ability to see without being
seen. It doesn’t really worry me to be in the water with sharks, though I do try to
be observant and aware. Situational awareness is a very useful sense when
you’re in the water. A good predator knows when they’re being spotted, and the
jig is up. If you watch fish around sharks, they are always keeping their eyes on
them and moving in ways to maintain vigilance. Usually, under these
circumstances, the shark either moves on or changes its behavior.”
Many swimmers are concerned that swimming motions could attract sharks,
but Dr. Lowe said, “While the splashing created by a swimmer is easily detected
by a shark, the constant rhythm of splashing from a swimmer is probably very
different than that of a seal or sea turtle. Seals are also good predators, and a lot

--- Page 202 Text ---
of splashing will give them away, so it would be unlikely for a seal or sea turtle
to produce a rhythmic splashing sound like a swimmer. Scuba divers are a good
example of a foreign, noisy critter in the water. Most of the noise comes from the
regulator. Most sharks seem to avoid scuba divers that use open circuit systems
and exhale noisy bubbles; however, the increased popularity of rebreathers
indicates that the quieter systems are not as off-putting to sharks. As a result,
some scientists have suggested using some sort of device that produces an
unusual mechanical noise—a kind of cowbell for bears.”
Dr. Lowe said, “I think the best thing a swimmer can do is to be aware and
observant. You won’t walk through a ‘bad’ neighborhood at night without a
buddy or while wearing headphones and reading a book. Most predators lose
interest if they know that their potential prey is aware of their presence and ready
to respond. It takes away their advantage. So, don’t make yourself a target; look
alert while you swim. Obviously, some areas have higher shark populations than
others, so it is always good to do your homework before you swim in an area,
and find out what kinds of marine life are common there. Swimming in central
and northern California in late summer and fall is not prudent due to the number
of white sharks in coastal waters then. You are much more likely to encounter
sharks on ocean swims in tropical waters than temperate waters; however, a lot
depends on the region. A quick Google search will turn up a lot about sharks in
your area.”
There is a huge concern about the decline of shark populations, which is
upsetting the natural balance of the oceans. Dr. Lowe said, “Many shark
populations have been reduced due to overfishing. The reef sharks are the most
susceptible due to their more limited wanderings, but even nomadic oceanic
species have been impacted. We really don’t understand how pollution affects
sharks, but we do know that many species accumulate large concentrations of
mercury and other contaminants through the food web. Based on our
understanding of how these contaminants affect mammals, it is likely they pose
health threats to sharks as well. There is some good news, though; better
fisheries management and cleaner water in some regions, such as California, are
allowing shark populations to recover. If we all work together, future generations
may be able to see sharks when they’re out for a nice swim!”

--- Page 203 Text ---
MINDS IN THE WATER
A few years ago, Bob West, the “kingpin” of the La Jolla group that swims in La
Jolla Cove, invited Oliver Sacks and me to swim with him. Bob spent a lot of his
life coaching football and swimming in the cove and Oliver grew up swimming
in the sea off the shores of England. Bob couldn’t wait to take us on a coastal
tour. He promised we would see leopard sharks ranging in size from three to four
feet; he said he and his pals swam with them all the time. Oliver and I were
excited and, I think, a little nervous. Oliver is one of the world’s top
neurologists, and he writes about people and the dramatic and often beautiful
accommodations they make to changes in the way their minds function. Oliver
wrote Awakenings, The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat, Musicophillia,
and many other books. He was in his early seventies and swimming and writing
and going strong.
We slipped under the waves and swam toward the buoy line that extends from
La Jolla Cove to La Jolla Shores. The water was clear, filled with thick kelp that
danced with the surf. There were bright orange garibaldi swimming among small
rocks and boulders, and spiny sea urchins, and sea bass.
When I turned to breathe, I glanced at Oliver, swimming between Bob and
me. His arm strokes looked smooth and effortless, and I could see them both
grinning like kids on a new adventure. I smiled and looked at the ocean beyond
them and suddenly saw a very large fin sticking out of the water. It was dark and
way too big to be a leopard shark’s. I stared at it to make sure I wasn’t mistaken
and then saw a second, larger fin right beside the first. The fins weren’t moving
from side to side, the way a shark’s would, but I wondered if I should say
something. A swell lifted the fins high above the water, and I saw the two
animals attached to them. They were seals. I started laughing. Bob and Oliver
saw me and stopped, and I pointed toward the seals and said, “Looks like a Gary
Larson cartoon. The seals have their flippers above their heads like they’re
imitating great white sharks!”
Bob explained that seals often rest on the water that way, and wondered if they
were extending their flippers to warm them in the sun. When we swam by a
rocky outcropping, I noticed a group of California sea lions resting on the rocks
with their hind flippers lifted toward the sun. I held my breath as we swam past
the rocks. The seals exuded a strong smell of excrement.
We continued toward La Jolla Shores and swam above three leopard sharks
hiding in screens of kelp. Their beautiful bodies were covered with black saddle-

--- Page 204 Text ---
like markings and large spots on their backs. They turned slightly and then swam
right beneath Oliver. They seemed to slow and watch him, and I told him that
with all the freckles he had on his shoulders, the leopard sharks probably thought
he was their cousin.
A few years later, when I was corresponding with L. Tadeus and trying to find
better ways to rewarm after cold exposure, the SEAL officer told me about a
heating/cooling device being developed at Stanford University by Dennis Grahn,
PhD, and Chuck Hixson, with a company called AVAcore. They are working
with the U.S. military to test this device. The idea is to have a
hypothermic/hyperthermic person place a hand or foot in the device, which will
warm or cool the hand or foot and, in turn, heat or cool the person’s core.
Perhaps the sea lions knew innately how to warm their core by extending their
flippers.
While it was fascinating to swim with sharks and sea lions in La Jolla Cove, it
is not something I would ordinarily do. I realize that I am taking on more risk
because they are wild animals; they are unpredictable and can be aggressive. A
couple of years ago, fourteen swimmers who routinely swam in the bay over a
few weeks’ time were bitten by a California sea lion. Wildlife experts thought
that swimmers may have swum too close to a rookery during breeding season, or
the sea lion may have eaten shellfish and sardines that had fed on phytoplankton,
thereby producing domoic acid, and the sea lion became sick and aggressive
when the toxins affected his brain.
U.S. NAVY DIVING MANUAL ON SHARKS
While shark attacks are uncommon, it’s important to know what to do if one
occurs. According to the U.S. Navy Diving Manual, there have been only forty to
one hundred shark attacks since 1965. The shark attacks were unpredictable and
the injuries were caused by bites and by coming in contact with the shark’s skin.
Sharkskin is incredibly rough and covered with sharp dentine appendages called
denticles. Rubbing against them can cause severe bleeding.
There are certain pre-attack behaviors that are predictable. According to the
Manual, “A shark preparing to attack swims with an exaggerated motion, its
pectoral fins pointing down in contrast to the usual flared-out position, and it
swims in circles of decreasing radius around the prey. An attack may be heralded
by unexpected acceleration or other marked change in behavior, posture, or
swim patterns. Should surrounding schools of fish become unexplainably
agitated, sharks may be in the area. Sharks are much faster and more powerful

--- Page 205 Text ---
than any swimmer. All sharks must be treated with extreme respect and caution.”

--- Page 206 Text ---
FIRST AID FOR SHARK BITES
Bites may result in a large amount of bleeding and tissue loss. Recommendations
from the U.S. Navy Diving Manual:
~ Get out of the water immediately.
~ Take immediate action to control bleeding, using large gauze pressure bandages.
~ Cover wounds with layers of compressive dressings, preferably made with gauze but easily
made from shirts or towels, and held in place by wrapping the wound tightly with gauze, torn
clothing, towels, or sheets.
~ Direct pressure with elevation or extreme compression on pressure points will control all but the
most serious bleeding. The major pressure points are: the radial artery pulse point for the hand; above
the elbow under the biceps muscle for the forearm (brachial artery); and the groin area with deep
fingertip or heel-of-the-hand pressure for bleeding from the leg (femoral artery).
~ When bleeding cannot be controlled by direct pressure and elevation or pressure points, a
tourniquet or ligature may be needed to save the victim’s life, even though there is the possibility of
loss of the limb.
~ Tourniquets are applied only as a last resort and with only enough pressure to control bleeding.
Do not remove the tourniquet. The tourniquet should be removed only by a physician in a hospital
setting. Loosening of a tourniquet may cause further shock by releasing toxins into the circulatory
system from the injured limb as well as continued blood loss.
~ Treat for shock by laying the patient down and elevating his feet.
~ If medical personnel are available, begin intravenous (IV) Ringer’s lactate or normal saline with
a large-bore cannula (16 or 18 gallons). If blood loss has been extensive, several liters should be
infused rapidly.
~ The patient’s color, pulse, and blood pressure should be used as a guide to the volume of fluid
required.
~ Maintain an airway and administer oxygen. Do not give fluids by mouth. If the patient’s
cardiovascular state is stable, narcotics may be administered in small doses for pain relief. Observe
closely for evidence of depressed respirations due to the use of narcotics.
~ Initial stabilization procedures should include attention to the airway, breathing, and circulation,
followed by a complete evaluation for multiple trauma.
~ Transport the victim to a medical facility as soon as possible. Reassure the patient.
Remember that shark attacks are rare. The Florida Museum of Natural
History’s International Shark Attack File states that the United States averages
less than one shark-attack death per year (see Sources for website address; this
page). According to Oceana, an international conservation organization focused
on protecting and restoring the world’s oceans, one hundred million sharks are
killed each year by industrial fishing.

--- OCR from Page 207 Image 1 ---
PART FOUR

Advanced Swimmers

--- Page 208 Text ---
Into the Dark

--- OCR from Page 208 Image 1 ---
Chapter 15
a

--- Page 209 Text ---
SWIMMING IN THE DARK
When people swim across the Catalina Channel and English Channel, they
usually make at least part of the crossing in the dark. When the sun goes down,
the wind often dies, so the ocean lies down, and it is much easier to swim across
calm seas.
Swimming in the dark is very different from swimming during daylight. It is
literally the difference between night and day. Some people are uncomfortable
and fearful during dark swims. Other people love being immersed in the dark,
swimming through eerie black waters that glow iridescent white and
phosphorescent green. They love the silky blackness of smooth curling waters,
and they love to watch the night sky and the progression of the moon, stars, and
planets.
When a group of swimmers from Seal Beach let me train with them to swim
across the Catalina Channel, it was all a grand adventure. We looked forward to
what would happen next. Our coach tried to prepare us as well as he could, and
he was open-minded. My father suggested that we work out at night. He thought
it would help our body clocks adjust, since we would be starting from Catalina
Island at midnight, when the wind was down and the seas were calm.
He also thought swimming in the darkness of night and early morning would
teach us how to see in the darkness, how to listen more intently for approaching
motor-boats and the coach’s voice. We would have to swim closer together and
learn not to bump into one another. We learned to navigate better, how to use the
small red and green lights on the distant oil rigs in Long Beach and the amber
glowing streetlights that lined the Seal Beach Pier.
At night and during the morning darkness, it was easier to stray off course,
because we had fewer visual cues in the dark. It took more focus to find our

--- Page 210 Text ---
balance in the water, and more concentration to pull with equal power on our
right and left sides so that we stayed on course. It was four or five nights before
we were able to consistently swim close together and maintain a straight course,
but there were times when we spaced out and hit someone else with an arm and
felt the other swimmer jump and sometimes scream and laugh. We had fun. We
were doing something so different, having new experiences, and expanding our
worlds.
When planning to do a swim at night, make sure you do some training swims
in the dark and have qualified support crew. First try swimming in a bay or
harbor, where the water is very calm and there is a lot of light on the water from
bridges and boats and alongshore from streetlights and cars.
As you gain more confidence, swim in increasingly darker and rougher
waters; always have an experienced kayaker or paddler beside you. Boaters are
not expecting swimmers in the dark, and sometimes they cross over into
designated swimming areas. The kayaker or paddler needs to be alert to this and
know how to move out of the way quickly.
The kayaker should feed you periodically to test out the food you plan to use
on your big swim. She should paddle at your pace, observe your stroke rate, and
know when you are feeling well and when you are dropping pace. It is helpful if
the kayaker is encouraging and honest. It is not helpful if the kayaker is negative.
Communication is even more important during dark swims because the
support crew may not be able to see your expressions and tell if you’re okay.

--- Page 211 Text ---
DARK SWIMS AND ILLUMINATION
When a group of swimmers contacted me for advice about a relay swim across
the Gulf of Baja, one of the questions they asked was: Will there be a problem
with sharks? They estimated that the six-man relay team would take roughly four
or five days to complete the swim. When they told me they were planning to
swim at night, I told them what fishermen had taught me: If you are going to
have lights on the water, make sure to keep them to a minimum. Lights attract
fish. The more lights you use, the more fish you attract, and eventually, you may
attract predatory fish. L. Tadeus commented: “Well-resourced swimmers may
want to consider night-vision devices and infrared chem lights/spotlights. You
can buy cheap versions of these at Cabela’s and other hunting places, such as
REI.
“You want your crew to use just enough light so that you can see without
attracting fish. And you want to make sure that the support crew can see you in
the water.”
I’ve discovered that the support boat’s running lights usually give enough
light for a swimmer to see the boat, along with small waterproof flashlights that
float strapped to the kayak or paddleboard or bow of a Zodiac to help make the
kayaker or paddler visible. We always carried extra batteries because if the water
was cool, the batteries were depleted faster.
Light-colored swimming caps make you visible in the water. I also suggested
that the relay members use reflective tape on the swimming caps, but not so
much that they would look like a lure.
After giving them this information, I contacted Chris Lowe to ask about shark
populations off Baja. Chris said that he didn’t think the sharks would be a
problem. But when he discovered that the swimmers planned to use green glow
sticks in the back of their swimsuits or attached to their caps, Chris advised to
use them sparingly. He explained the fishermen off the shores of Mexico used
glow sticks in the Gulf of Baja to attract giant squid. He said on a swim in that
area, he would be more concerned about being attacked by a giant squid than by
a shark.

--- Page 212 Text ---
FINDING BETTER ILLUMINATION
For years, I’ve been trying to figure out how to help people swim more safely,
especially at night. This concern grew when I heard about a Swiss swimmer who
was crossing the English Channel and disappeared into a dark wave and was
gone. A few days later, his body was recovered off the shores of Belgium. When
I talking with Traci Gray, my friend who is a loadmaster for the United States
Air Force, she asked, “Why don’t you use lasers? We use them all the time for
our C-17.”
She explained that if the lasers are positioned correctly, a swimmer can see the
boat more easily in the dark and also in the fog. While I haven’t had the
opportunity to try this advice, it sounds very helpful.
Before we did our dark swims off Seal Beach, we checked the weather
forecast. If the weather forecast was for fog, we didn’t swim. It is easy to
become disoriented or lost in the fog, even if you are only a few yards from the
beach.
When the air is hot and the water is cool, fog often develops. There are many
places in the United States and around the world where fog is part of the normal
weather pattern. Check the weather forecast before you swim. As an additional
precaution, you might want to wear a GPS wristwatch or compass to help you
get back to shore if you get caught in the fog.

--- Page 213 Text ---
Seasickness
For centuries people have traveled by boat and ship and been affected by the
movement of water. The Chinese discovered that eating the root of the beautiful
leafy and flowering ginger plant and drinking tea made from the root would
alleviate the mild symptoms of seasickness. Today cruise ships that travel across
the Drake Passage, where sea swells routinely rise to over thirty feet, carry a
variety of products: cubes of candied ginger, packets of ginger teas, and a variety
of over-the-counter seasickness medications. Getting seasick, whether on the
boat before your swim or in the water, can be hell.
When you’re in rough water, there’s no way to escape a boat’s rocking,
rolling, and spinning. People tolerate movement across the water differently.
Some people get seasick just being on a boat in a harbor, while others can endure
very rough seas. A few years ago, my friends and I sailed out of Ushuaia,
Argentina, to Antarctica on an icebreaker. Before we left port, we were told that
when we crossed the Drake Passage, the waves could be up to eighty feet high.
The highest waves I’d sailed through were ten to fifteen feet. I hoped we would
experience those huge waves and could only imagine how powerful they’d be.
For two and a half days, the ship constantly met seas that were thirty to forty
feet high. The waves did not move in rolling sets; their motion was irregular. The
icebreaker shimmied, rocked, rolled, jerked to one side and the other, and then
abruptly dropped into a trough or shot up into a crest.
The view from the porthole resembled a washing machine on spin cycle. My
two cabinmates had taken seasickness medications but weren’t able to hold
down either those or the candied ginger they had eaten to stave off their
queasiness. One friend tried the anti-seasickness patch and experienced one of
the side effects—paranoia—and when she got some of the medication on her
fingers and rubbed her eyes, they dilated and she was miserable.

--- OCR from Page 213 Image 1 ---
Chapter 16
J. SS.

--- Page 214 Text ---
Having been on boats in rough seas, I knew I wasn’t prone to seasickness, but
I had never experienced waves so large and wasn’t sure if they would affect me.
I couldn’t afford to lose electrolytes before my swim, and I didn’t want to move
around the ship and risk tumbling and breaking an arm, so I lay in my bunk and
looked out the porthole. One moment the porthole was covered by spinning
water, and the next moment there was air.
We were okay until a fifty-foot wave hit the ship so hard, it launched us out of
our bunks, broke the hinges on our dresser, and the drawers flew across the
room, along with luggage and bedding. For a moment we were stunned, then
checked on one another, and when we found that we were all okay, we crawled
back into our bunks and lay there laughing. It took my friends a few days after
the passage to feel normal. It was good that we had the buffer of a few days
before my swim, so they could participate as support crew.
Seasickness can render support crew completely ineffective. L. Tadeus noted
that “when someone goes down with motion sickness, they essentially take
another person down with them to tend to them.”
This is exactly what happened on a recent night swim across Catalina. The
swimmer’s wife, the official observer, and the assistant observer were supposed
to watch over, feed, and support the swimmer, but they all got seasick and went
below to lie down.
The kayaker, who had made about twenty crossings of the Catalina Channel
over the past couple of years, was supposed to paddle beside the swimmer. She
recognized that conditions were too rough; she didn’t think she could control the
kayak and was afraid of putting herself and the swimmer at risk. She decided to
stay on the boat.
A friend who raced outrigger canoes and had paddled through huge ocean
swells offered to be the backup kayaker. This was the first time he had kayaked
on a Catalina Channel crossing. He said the waves were breaking all over the
place, and it was incredibly rough. He was surprised that the pilot had told the
swimmer he could swim. Shortly after he began paddling, a large wave flipped
the kayak and tossed him in the water.
The paddler on deck, who had taken on the responsibility of being the person
in charge, was focusing intently on the paddler and the swimmer, concerned that
she might lose them in the black raging water. The captain recognized that the
kayaker needed assistance, left his wheel-house, and tossed the kayaker a line.
The kayaker managed to grab the rope, recover the kayak, flip it back over in the
rough seas, climb in, and begin paddling again, but the waves continued to grow.
He tried to communicate with the swimmer to see if he was okay, but the
swimmer spoke French and knew only a few words of English. His wife spoke

--- Page 215 Text ---
some English and could have translated and checked on him, but she was below
deck.
Now the kayaker, who had never gotten seasick, was feeling like he was going
to vomit. He told the kayaker on deck that he was not feeling well. He said that
he was bothered by the diesel fumes. She knew it was not unusual for swimmers
and crew members to catch whiffs of diesel because of wind shifts and the boat’s
movement, but the kayaker in the water and swimmer were getting prolonged
exposure.
She was beginning to feel seasick, too, but she knew she had to stay on deck
to watch the kayaker and the swimmer. She had heard about the swimmer from
Switzerland who had disappeared into the waves.
She did not know that breathing fumes accentuated the effects of seasickness.
She did not know that something far more critical could be happening—that
breathing fumes could cause the swimmer and the kayaker to pass out, aspirate
water, and drown. This had happened during a professional swimming race in
the 1950s in Argentina. She was not aware that over the years, swimmers had
been pulled out of the water after getting sick from the engine fumes.
That’s why, in planning a swim and selecting a support boat, the person
coordinating the swim should select a boat with a dry stack, which means that
the diesel fumes are emitted into the air.
If the kayaker had been able to communicate with the pilot—if she’d had
other people on board to watch the swimmer and kayaker—she could have
informed the pilot that they were getting fumes, and he could have changed the
position of the boat. But at that point, he was doing his best to keep the swimmer
on course, using the boat to buffer the waves.
The seas got worse. The swimmer got stung all over his arms by jellyfish and
could not communicate that to the kayaker. At four and a half hours into the
swim, the swimmer decided that he was done. He climbed out of the water.
This is how L. Tadeus evaluated the swim:
The kayaker on the boat did exactly what she should have done. She conducted
some time-critical risk management and realized that the prevailing conditions
were beyond her capability level. She knew her go/no-go criteria and opted out.
Smart.
The boat support personnel did just the opposite. They probably did not
conduct any planning or risk management. If they had, they would have known
that weather forecasts for the swim were not promising (risk mitigation).
Additionally, if they were smart (per their physician’s guidance), they would
have taken prophylactic doses of meclizine starting twelve hours before the

--- Page 216 Text ---
swim and every twelve hours throughout the swim to avoid becoming seasick, at
a minimum (risk mitigation). They were all mission-ineffective owing to their
lack of experience/foresight/knowledge of their limitations. In my humble
opinion they put themselves and the swimmer at greater risk.
The swimmer fell somewhere in the middle. He could have done a better job
planning, and he could have been less aggressive. He might or might not have
known about the weather. He certainly did not know anything about the
capabilities of his boat support crew, or he likely would have opted out sooner. It
sounds as if he really wanted to swim and pushed a bad position, hoping the
weather would improve. At least he finally made a smart call, for everyone’s
sake.
Clearly, none of them had conducted rehearsals or operations in these
meteorological and oceanographic conditions (risk mitigation). The kayaker
should have been a better friend to the swimmer and told him no from the start.
The swimmer experienced a significant failure to recognize his own limitations.
Hopefully, he learned from the experience. Hopefully, everyone learned from
this experience. Hopefully, they conducted, at a minimum, an informal debrief
afterward.
Swimmers and boat crews who are considering taking seasickness
medications should consult with their physicians beforehand and let the crew
know if they do take them.
Years ago, a group of teenagers and I were attempting to swim across the
Catalina Channel. One of our friends who was making the attempt was
concerned because she had a history of getting seasick when she rode in small
boats in moderate seas. She also had a history of becoming disoriented and
hypothermic during training swims.
My father was the physician on board the boat. Without consulting him before
the swim, the coach offered us seasickness medication. None of us had ever used
these medications before, so we had no way of knowing how they would affect
us. Only one swimmer accepted. About halfway across the channel, she became
hypothermic and had to be pulled out. I’ve always wondered if she would have
made it across without the medication. All the other swimmers completed the
swim.
There will always be new situations on a long swim, things that can’t be
anticipated. If I were going to consider taking seasickness medications, I would
test them out during my workouts, and I would have someone watching over me
during those swims. If I had crew members who were susceptible to getting
seasick, I would ask them to consult their physicians about the best medication
and test it before the swim.

--- Page 217 Text ---
The SEALs are trained to work in extreme seas under challenging conditions.
They cannot be ineffective due to motion sickness, or not alert due to meds.
They have jobs that have to be done. That’s why they “practice like they play.”
They test seasickness meds during their training, which is crucial to knowing
how the meds will affect them.
They understand that seasickness can render support crews completely
ineffective. Some seasickness meds cause drowsiness and can affect mental
alertness. But for those who get seasick, something is better than nothing. The
SEALs have found that most seasickness meds are like anti-psychotics; the
levels have to build up in your system and be continuously maintained. So
anybody who thinks he’s going to take a pill right before getting on a boat and be
fine is wrong. SEALs take them twelve hours in advance, with regular light
doses throughout the trip or until they feel comfortable coming down from them.
They do it with medical guidance. Medical professionals should always be
consulted when someone is considering taking seasickness meds.
Sometimes people are unprepared and get seasick. In one extreme case on a
SEAL dive in rough seas, a couple of nurses experienced debilitating
seasickness. They came up with an original solution. They administered
seasickness meds to each other with rectal suppositories, which provided
immediate relief. This method is not for the faint of heart. The SEALs do not
recommend transdermal patches at all, because sea spray can wash off or dilute
them.
SEALs generally have high tolerances for pain and thus for medications.
Seasickness meds, muscle relaxers, and pain meds are for them what daily
vitamins are for most other people; Motrin might as well be a sugar pill. Some
doctors are medicine averse. But the SEALs operate way out on a pretty far edge
of human performance on a routine basis.

--- Page 218 Text ---
TAKING MEDICATIONS DURING A SWIM
Some swimmers take over-the-counter medications during their swims for sore
shoulders and aching necks and backs. What many people do not realize is that
many of these medications have not been tested on people during strenuous
activity. A swim is not the place to experiment.
This information should not be taken as medical advice. Always consult with
your physician if you are going to take medications before or during a long
swim.
There may be an additional downside to taking medications, according to L.
Tadeus:
If someone is exercising very strenuously, to the point of
compromising his biochemistry, then it is possible that even a small
dose of medication could push him over the edge to complete
compromise and injury.
An anti-inflammatory stops inflammation, and therefore pain,
during strenuous activity. The pain is the body’s way of saying, “Slow
down, you’re doing something damaging.” The human body was not
designed to do all the things we do with it. Overuse injuries are so
common for SEALs that we have physical therapy clinics on both
coasts. A bigger concern is that anti-inflammatory meds tend to thin
the blood, which makes bleeding difficult to stop and has some impact
on heat conduction: They can make you bleed out in a traumatic injury
scenario or sea-life attack and may lead to hypo-or hyperthermia
faster, depending on the dosage. There is also the amplified effect they
have on the liver during strenuous activities, especially those that
dehydrate you. Fortunately, the liver can regenerate.
I’d never considered that medications could affect the body differently
depending upon the person’s activity. I spoke with Bob Griffith, one of my
support crew, who is a pharmacist. Bob considered it for a moment and said, “Of
course your body will be functioning differently when you’re strenuously
exercising than when you’re at rest, and the medications would react differently.
What is the best medication you can take for anything?”
“I don’t know,” I said.
“Nothing, unless you have to,” he said.

--- Page 219 Text ---
Preparation
In everything, preparation is one of the keys to success. Still, there is a growing
number of people who want to swim in open water and attempt long swims but
do not realize the amount of time and effort it takes to prepare. Recently, a
teenager who had climbed the seven summits—the highest mountain on every
continent—emailed to ask if I thought he could prepare to swim across the
English Channel in a wet suit in six months. He was serious. While I didn’t want
to dash his enthusiasm, and I realized he was an incredible athlete, I explained
that you want to be as prepared as you can to attempt a channel swim, and that it
took me years of training with Olympic swimming coaches and another few
years to acclimate to the cold. Even in a wet suit, he would lose 80 percent of
heat through his head and would cool down in the water. You have to train for
open water swimming in the open water, and you have to overprepare, because
you never know what challenges you’ll encounter during any big swim.
That brings me to the college student from a prestigious university who swam
on the women’s team and decided to cross the English Channel, probably
because her parents had planned a trip to England and Europe and she thought
she could fit in the swim. She asked me for advice, but she did not seem at all
prepared. She was three months away from her attempt; she had not been
training in the open water, had not conditioned to the cold water, and didn’t
know the name of her pilot.
She swam in rough conditions and made it across in over seventeen hours. She
said she blew out both shoulders. Was it worth it? Would she have permanent
physical damage?
One reason we condition is to strengthen our bodies and muscles to propel us
through the water. We also need that muscle strength to help protect our joints. If
we do not work out hard enough or long enough, we can become injured.

--- OCR from Page 219 Image 1 ---
Chapter 17
A SS. as

--- Page 220 Text ---
If she had taken the swim seriously and conditioned, she might not have
blown out her shoulders and might have swum much faster. It comes down to
taking the time to be as physically and mentally prepared as you can be.

--- Page 221 Text ---
PHYSICAL TRAINING
When you train in the open water, you need to prepare as much as you can
physically before your swim. If you don’t, you risk injury, or you might not
complete your goal. Open water swimming is very different from pool
swimming, where you pretty much know that you’ll complete your workout or
competitive race. In the open water, there are no guarantees, but your chances of
success are a lot higher if you are prepared.
You need to train specifically for the distance you’re going to swim. Everyone
is different; the amount of time needed to train, the distances needed to swim,
and the recovery time between workouts all depends on the individual. It
depends on your background and how much you’ve worked out over the years. It
depends on the distance and intensity you’ve been training, the efficiency of
your stroke, and many other factors.
You need to have a coach/trainer and/or a group of swimmers to train with. In
some ways, it is similar to the way SEAL trainees train: with instructors who
guide, see what they’re doing, and help them make corrections if needed.

--- Page 222 Text ---
MENTAL PREPARATION
Once after I gave a lecture to a group of seven hundred prominent people
connected with a foundation in Mumbai, India, a ten-year-old boy asked: “When
you do the long-distance swims, it takes great physical endurance, but do you
think that your ability to achieve the swim is ninety percent mental? That a
positive mind-set makes all the difference?”
What a terrific question. My response was that each person finds strength to
do a long-distance swim from different sources. For some swimmers, it may be a
positive mind-set; for others, it may be that they trained for a long period of
time. For me, it is both. If I do not train, I am not prepared mentally, and I do not
have confidence in my ability. If being able to achieve a long distance were just
about having a positive attitude, I would not train as hard as I do. Positive
thoughts and confidence do not physically prepare swimmers for long-distance
swims.
For example, you have to be physically and mentally strong to swim the
English Channel. Determination is key to completing the swim. You need to
have the mind-set that you can complete the swim, especially when the currents
are taking you on a tour of the French or English coast or when you are
swimming as hard as you can and moving backward. You need to be able to keep
going, increase your speed, and continue as long as you have to in order to reach
the shore. And do this for hours on end.
For most swimmers, the English Channel is an epic struggle. You never know
how the channel is going to challenge you, or what you will find deep within
yourself during those challenges.
When you finally get the call and your pilot says, “Your swim’s on for
tonight,” you will experience relief that you’re finally getting to go, and you will
feel great excitement and uncertainty. What some swimmers do better than
others is to push aside these emotions and take a few deep breaths to calm down
so they use all their energy for the swim. Some swimmers might have had
mentors help them prepare mentally.
Fahmy Attallah was the one who did that for me. He was a friend of a friend,
and when we met, when I was fourteen years old, he was a school psychologist
in California who, years before, attempted the English Channel five times. Like
Yoda, who taught Luke Skywalker how to tap in to the Force and use his
instincts to become a warrior, Fahmy was tiny, only five feet tall, and his balding
head had white patches of hair above rather large ears. He looked like a

--- Page 223 Text ---
grandfather, his brown eyes were bright and his laugh deep and hearty, and he
spoke in a clear and calm voice. He was trim, his muscles were well defined, and
he was physically strong. He ate a healthy and balanced diet with lots of fruit
and vegetables, and he fasted on Sundays to cleanse his system.
When we measured our hands by putting them palm to palm, his were smaller
than mine, and his feet were smaller, too. He laughed deeply and told me, “A
person’s size and age does not matter when you swim across the English
Channel. The water is a great equalizer of men and women. You are fourteen
years old, but you have been swimming a long time, and you have swum
Catalina and you are training with the best Olympic coach, and you are very
determined. I know that if you get good weather, you will swim the English
Channel and break the men’s and women’s world records. You have the strength
and the determination to do it.”
Each time we met for dinner, he asked about my training sessions and how I
was doing and whether I was getting enough rest. He asked if I was acclimating
to the cold. He worried about the cold, though he tried not to show it. He did not
have a chance to condition for the cold water, having grown up in Egypt, and
that was a big part of what prevented him from completing his channel swim. He
told me I needed to spend a lot of time training for the cold.
Whenever I saw him, he’d say, “The ocean is God’s greatest and most
beautiful creation.” When he did his daily swims off Long Beach, he meditated.
He asked what I thought about when I swam, and I told him: I focused on my
breath—on the sounds of my inhales and exhales; on the long streams of bubbles
released into the water. I felt myself move through the water, and felt how it
lifted and flowed around me. For hours I listened to the sounds of my hands
capturing water and pulling me across the sea. Sometimes, I felt at one with the
water. He told me that I meditated, too.
Fahmy told me detailed stories about training off the shores of Folkestone and
in Dover Harbor. His voice would grow dreamy as he said, “The white cliffs are
very beautiful. They are so white and high, and you can see them for many,
many miles. They are something you never forget.”
There was, in all of this, great joy and sadness. He tried not to show his
sadness, but sometimes his voice cracked or tightened when he recounted his
channel swims and the disappointment he felt when he didn’t complete them. He
took the discipline and determination from channel swimming and applied them
to his life. Those experiences helped him get to England to study at university,
and once he graduated, he moved to California to start his practice. He knew that
by giving me the gift of his wisdom, he also gave me his dreams to carry on my
channel swim.

--- Page 224 Text ---
He told me about the sounds of the waves in Dover Harbor, how the water
gently caressed the pebbles. He said the sounds were soothing and they changed
with the size of the waves. He described the plaintive calls of the seagulls as they
circled high over the white cliffs, the deep moans of the foghorns near the
entrance to the harbor, and the blasts of horns of ferryboats and the hovercraft.
Fahmy said that when you enter the water in Dover Harbor, you step down a
gentle slope, and you feel the pebbles tumbling over your feet first and then the
cold water enveloping you as you walk deeper in. He talked about the way the
water felt when he swam, how it was buoyant and how the cold continuously
nipped at his skin. He described the course where swimmers trained, and the
beach between the ferry and hovercraft terminals, and the pier with a clock tower
where swimmers checked their paces and listened to the tower clock chime. He
said that this harbor was a special place where swimmers from all over the world
met, exchanged knowledge, and often became friends forever.
During one crossing, he swam for twenty-seven hours. He described how tides
carried him backward and how he watched the British shore disappear as he
drifted toward Belgium. He described the time he got within four hundred yards
of the English shore and his crew pulled him out because they thought he was
hypothermic.
He set in my mind the attributes that a swimmer needs to swim the English
Channel. He said, “You must be a very strong swimmer and have great
endurance. You must be able to withstand the cold, waves, and wind for hours on
hours. You must be fast to break through currents, and you must be powerful to
endure the cold for hours on end.” He said he knew I could do this.
Fahmy helped me envision what it would be like. With his memories, he
helped fuel my imagination. At night before I went to sleep, I heard the sounds
of the waves in Dover Harbor and the calls of the seagulls. The English Channel
has not changed much in all these years. Neither have the coasts of England and
France.
It always helps to find other swimmers who have swum the English Channel,
who will sit down and give you their time and share their experiences and help
you mentally prepare for your swim.
What most swimmers not do know is that there can be an emotional letdown
after a big swim. Mark, a swimmer who’d completed the Catalina Channel an
hour or so before our meeting, said he felt a sense of accomplishment but also,
“Completing the swim was bittersweet. I felt somewhat sad,” he said.
Most swimmers go through a period of elation, and then they have a difficult
time unwinding and sometimes sleeping after a big swim. It usually takes some
time for the achievement to sink in, and a few days or weeks before swimmers

--- Page 225 Text ---
feel a letdown.
After I swam the English Channel at age fifteen and broke the men’s and
women’s records, I was at a loss. I didn’t have any idea what I wanted to do
next. Fortunately, Davis Hart, a great swimmer and coach from Springfield,
Massachusetts, swam across the English Channel a couple of months after I did.
He broke my record and gave me a new focus. I decided to train hard and return
to the channel to try to break his time. When I achieved that goal the following
summer, I already had an idea of what I wanted to do next. I could use the
momentum from each success to work on larger goals.
It is important to have a plan for what you will do if you succeed at your goal
and what to if you don’t.

--- Page 226 Text ---
Going In and Out of Consciousness
Chloë McCardel, an Australian swimmer who completed an amazing double
crossing of the English Channel, decided to return to England to attempt a triple
crossing. She was a fast and powerful swimmer with magnificent endurance, and
she had the very best crew. Paul, her husband, was part of her support crew and
had a strong open water swimming background. Murph Renford was on her
swim as well. He had swum across the English Channel himself, and as a boy, he
had accompanied Des Renford, his father, on his English Channel swim. Over
the years, Murph had mentored other Australian swimmers. Chloë also selected
Reg and Ray Brickell for her triple crossing attempt. They were two of the most
experienced English Channel pilots.
As boys, Reg and Ray worked with their father, Reg Sr., on their fishing boat
and during English Channel attempts. They learned about the sea and about the
swimmers, and they all took great pride in Reg Sr.’s achievement of guiding the
most world record–breaking swimmers.
Reg and Ray had been on Des’s solo swims and attempts for a double. They
had learned from the best, and they upgraded their technology whenever they
could to give their swimmer an additional edge. Reg Jr. had been on my English
Channel swim, as well as David Yudovin’s successful swim. Even though Chloë
had the best support team, something went wrong.
Over breakfast months later, Murph told me about Chloe’s swim. He was
concerned about what had happened. It really bothered him that neither he nor
Paul had recognized that Chloë was in trouble. He wanted to talk about it and
make other swimmers and crew more aware and their swims safer.
Murph said that Chloë completed the first lap of her English Channel triple in
just over nine hours and three minutes, the fastest crossing of the season. When
she reached shore, she looked happy, strong, and very capable. The crew

--- OCR from Page 226 Image 1 ---
Chapter 18

a

--- Page 227 Text ---
watched her push off the French shore and swim back toward England. Paul
watched her along with Murph on deck. Reg and Ray had a camera fixed on
Chloë at all times and watched her from the pilot’s cabin. Chloë and Paul agreed
with the current status quo, whereby the pilot has the final decision of when to
pull a swimmer out—not the observer or support crew.
The sea conditions were good. Chloë swam in 60-degree F (15.5-degree C)
water. She stopped to tread water and eat or drink roughly every twenty to thirty
minutes. Reg met with Paul to discuss her progress and condition, and the
observers listened to the conversation nearly every time. Paul and Chloë had
tested an internal core temperature machine in the weeks leading into the
channel attempt, but unfortunately, they had to abandon the device days before
the swim due to technical difficulties.
Around the twelve-hour mark, Paul noticed that Chloë was getting cranky
during her feed stops. Murph hoped that she was just fatigued and would swim
through it and be better on the other side. He was so seasick that he went below
to sleep. When he came back on deck an hour later, Paul said that Chloë was not
swimming her best but was still making good progress; her stroke rate had
slowed only slightly. However, Reg and Ray noted that Chloë was making much
slower progress on the slack tide. They knew she was capable of swimming
faster. Her stoke rate had dropped to the low sixties, compared with her normal
sixty-six strokes per minute. She was unaware of her stroke rate during the
swim.
Her budget allowed for only two support crew and two observers for a
marathon swim that could have lasted up to forty hours. At times Murph became
very seasick and had to relinquish his duties to Paul. The observers were a father
and daughter. They were there to monitor Chloë’s progress and to advise the
pilot and crew if she were in danger and needed to be pulled out of the water.
Murph said that the father seemed competent but the daughter really had no idea
of her job. In fact, at times she was on the other side of the boat, out of Chloë’s
view, while her father was below sleeping.
Murph said that he got very worried when “Chloe had a really big vomit at
one particular feed stop.” He thought that was what began her downward spiral.
It had happened to him on his first attempt across the Catalina Channel. He had
eaten a pasta dish and thought he might have food poisoning, but he started off
anyway and began vomiting on the swim and continued to be sick and ultimately
had to get out of the water. Murph said, “As the swim progressed further, she had
difficulties consuming all one hundred percent of her feeds.” Chloë disagreed.
She said that her swim was different from Murph’s; the one feed when she was
sick, despite losing approximately ten minutes in speed, had a minimal effect on

--- Page 228 Text ---
the rest of her swim and did not contribute to her drop in core temperature down
the track. In fact, her stroke rate decreased rapidly after a cold front set in on the
channel, which was many hours after she had vomited. Paul and Chloë believe
she was consuming 90 percent of her feeds, which is standard for her marathon
swimming. Paul puts about 110 percent of what she should consume into each
feed, to be conservative. The experts Chloë and Paul spoke to believe the cold
front was the cause of her severe hypothermia.
Murph and Paul, channel swimmers themselves, and the observers who were
experts, did not recognize that she was in trouble. Chloë did not show any
outward signs of hypothermia. She wasn’t shivering or slurring her speech. They
knew her pace was slower, but they just thought she was going through a bad
spot, as often happens on channel swims when the swimmer gets tired or
struggles against a current. Murph believed that because of her two previous
English Channel swims—forty-seven hours in total—she could pull off the
triple. And with her track record, who could blame him?
The perplexing thing for Murph was that Chloë never complained; she was
prepared to keep swimming. Murph said, “Reg also noted that Chloë was still six
miles (9.6 kilometers) off completing the double. This meant a possible six hours
for her to get to England, and the way she was swimming, it just wasn’t on. Paul,
with all on board, agreed that the swim was over. Chloë was the only one not on
the same page, partly because of the condition she was in and partly because she
is just so bloody tough. She was only swimming sixteen hundred meters an hour
on a slack tide when she averages four thousand meters an hour, and from a
stroke rate that dropped from sixty-six to fifty-two strokes a minute over the last
ninety minutes, it was clear that the triple was not on and that a double was not
even an option.”
Murph and Paul called her over to the swim ladder located at the stern of the
boat. Chloë swam over and looked at the ladder but wouldn’t touch it. She knew
as soon as she touched it, the swim was over. This is the most difficult part for a
swimmer, when she wants to continue but can’t. It is equally hard on the crew.
But Murph and Paul realized that Chloë had reached her limit.
Finally, Murph convinced Chloë, she grabbed the ladder, and the crew pulled
her out of the water and onto the deck. They immediately wrapped her in
blankets, and she seemed okay. She fell asleep with her head resting on Paul’s
shoulder, and when they reached the Folkestone harbor, she woke up, but she
was not mentally coherent and could not walk without a lot of support. Paul and
Murph realized that Chloë was in very bad shape.
Murph realized it would take too long for an ambulance to respond. He and
Paul put Chloë in a car and raced to the hospital. A critical-care physician

--- Page 229 Text ---
attended to her. He said that she had been going in and out of consciousness and
aspirating water throughout her swim. The water she aspirated had gone into her
lungs. She spent two days in intensive care before she was well enough to be
released from the hospital. The doctor told them that if Chloë had been in the
water another half an hour, she could have died. What concerned Murph and the
other team members was that Chloë was so programmed to complete the swim,
she would have continued without realizing the danger she was in.
Murph’s concerns became mine. Like Murph, I wanted to know if there were
better ways of monitoring a swimmer. Because of Reg’s experience, he
recognized that Chloë was getting into trouble long before everyone else did, but
he wanted to give her the benefit of the doubt.
L. Tadeus often works with colleagues and trainees who are pushing
themselves to their limits, and because the SEAL instructors have to know where
those limits are, I asked him what he thought might have happened during
Chloë’s swim.
He said he thought that the swimmer might have been asleep while
swimming. It had happened to him during Hell Week, a time when SEAL
trainees go through extreme mental and physical training and stress, with limited
sleep.
He was conducting an event called “the base tour.” Essentially, the trainees
ran around Naval Amphibious Base Coronado for three hours. He remembered
only bits and pieces of it, because he was running while he was sleeping. He
explained that the mind does what it perceives it needs to do on all levels. If you
need to keep swimming, the mind will allow that, as long as it can accomplish
other critical functions simultaneously.
He said that a competent doctor would have known to ask questions that
required reasoning. Even if Chloë had a very sharp mind, eventually, she would
lose the ability to problem-solve and reason. He gave the following
recommendations:
~ Don’t ask the swimmer what year it is. Ask what year last year was or what year was two years
ago.
~ Don’t ask the swimmer what day of the week it is. Ask what day two days ago was. Make her
think. Make her say a riddle.
He continued:
There are tons of neurological deficits that occur in these situations.
Here’s an example: When our trainees surface after a free swimmer
ascent, we require them to say specifically, “I feel fine!” Not “I feel

--- Page 230 Text ---
good,” “I’m cool,” “Awesome,” or anything else. If a diver is suffering
from arterial gas embolism, it will manifest itself in an inability to
pronounce two consecutive words beginning with the letter F. It would
not surprise me if there were a hypothermia-related analogue to this.
Chloë’s speed drop was a pretty good indicator in and of itself.
Anyone watching closely enough would have seen her aspirating water
routinely—another big indicator. Despite the crew’s experience, they
were on quite a long journey; their rotation plan to keep topside safety
observers fresh and alert was not adequate.
If a swim is long, the swimmer will need sleep at some point. It
baffles me how someone can fall asleep while running or swimming.
The SEALs believe that the mind separates things into layers. There
are things that the mind controls without conscious thought (breathing,
sleeping, sweating, pumping blood), and there are things that require
conscious thought. Conscious decisions can blur the line between these
barriers.
Researchers have discovered that we can decide what we do even
when the brain is telling us we should do something else. A father can
grab a burning pot and throw it in the sink because he knows it will
save his family from death—in spite of the fact that his brain is telling
him not to touch it. A swimmer will consciously complete a channel
swim in spite of severe shoulder pain indicating that overuse injury is
occurring.
So the SEALS regularly have their trainees continue to train past
certain points; they aren’t ordered to do it. They just train to the point
of unconsciousness, when what their brain is telling them to do is get
to the surface and breathe. Human limits are very far from where we
perceive them to be. Many times it boils down to desire.
The key for us is that the SEALS are the elite maritime force. They have
incredible training, knowledge, and standards, and their instructors and
leadership create safety nets that enable trainees and SEALs to push themselves
as far as they can go, so that they are extremely prepared for their missions. In
open water swimming, swimmers push themselves to their limits. The support
crew for the a swim has to know how far a swimmer can go, when the swimmer
is in trouble, or when the swimmer has reached his limits. There’s always a
balance, but it is often elusive to know where that is. That’s why swimmers need
to know their own capabilities and have support crew who know their histories.

--- Page 231 Text ---
Swimmers may not realize when they have reached their limit, and this decision
may have to be made for them without their help. Swimmers cannot remain
objective.
DEEP MIND “THING”
There is a point on some swims when I’ve been so deep in my mind that I am
not aware of what’s going on around me. I know that other open water
swimmers have had a similar experience. It’s different from daydreaming, when
your mind floats from one topic to another. When you are engaged in the deep
mind “thing,” you are going much deeper into your thoughts.
SEALs experience the deep mind thing. Some do it when they swim or run
and emerge from it and wonder where the last couple of miles went. The SEALs
call this “going to your happy place.”
They discovered that the deep mind thing sometimes happens at even a
slightly deeper level for trainees during Hell Week. It’s as if they are
experiencing two different realities simultaneously, and when they emerge from
deep mind into reality, they aren’t quite sure which is real for a while.
This disconnection—perhaps learned through intense training—carries over
for some people to everyday life. Are there times when you’ve been driving and
can remember only the beginning and the destination but not the drive itself?
Have you ever emerged from deep mind to find yourself in a situation that only a
quick reaction would get you out of? Ever find yourself too close to oncoming
traffic and have to jerk the wheel to navigate back to your lane? What are the
potential consequences on a swim?
The SEALs have learned that there is something all swimmers can do that
doesn’t interfere with rhythm. It requires neurological fitness; and it gives a
positive indication to surface support. Also, it can’t become muscle memory, so
that a swimmer does it even when practically or actually unconscious.
The SEALs use a periodic interaction, visual or physical, that forces the
trainee/swimmer to problem-solve in order to come up with the correct signals.
They recognize that it’s difficult to do it in a way that doesn’t interrupt the
swimmer’s rhythm, so they create a meaningful interaction between the
swimmer and the surface so that support can truly assess the swimmer’s physical
and mental state. That might come in the form of a thirty-second break every ten
minutes during which the swimmer has to answer questions that require thought.
For example, what was last year’s date? What was yesterday’s date? What is
tomorrow’s date? What is the date before your birthday? Who was the last

--- Page 232 Text ---
president? The questions require consciousness, brief thought, and problem
solving, but aren’t as complicated as a Rubik’s Cube. The trainees respond with
very brief answers.
The SEALs routinely use hand signals to convey information. One instructor
suggested that swimmers work with their crews to develop hand signals to
provide answers to questions. The questions could be asked over a diver recall
transducer, or underwater speaker, so the swimmer can hear the questions
underwater. The answers can be given while taking a stroke. There are a lot of
signals that are possible with the hands and fingers.

--- Page 233 Text ---
SLEEP
There are open water swimmers who attempt swims that last for over twenty-
four hours, and there are triathletes who attempt double Ironmans that take over
twenty hours to complete. If swimmers are using the Channel Swimming
Association rules, they aren’t allowed to climb into the support boat or have any
kind of artificial assistance during their swims, and they are not able to stop and
sleep. No doubt, these huge swims and triathlons test minds and bodies, but it’s
worth taking a look at how the SEALs train, to understand what sleep
deprivation does to the mind and body, and why it’s so important to integrate
sleep into the training cycle.
The instructors know that there is a specific amount of sleep that trainees must
get. This was not always the case. For earlier SEAL trainee classes, sleep was
incidental. One SEAL remembered that during Hell Week, the trainees got forty-
five minutes of sleep one night—but not because they needed sleep. The
instructors put the trainees down to rewarm them, because the air temperature
had dropped to 37 degrees F (2.7 degrees C). Now very brief sleep periods are
programmed into the schedule, based on scientific research.
These days instructors take things much slower and conduct a lot more
medical monitoring. They have observed that sleep deprivation makes trainees
much more susceptible to hypothermia, hyperthermia, hypoglycemia, viral
gastroenteritis, and swimmer-induced pulmonary edema. Sleep deprivation also
increases the risk of injury, despite a healthy diet. Instructors have found that the
body needs time to shut down and conduct maintenance. Sleep deprivation
compromises an immune system.
Five days of straight sleep deprivation is about as long as an instructor would
take someone before letting him shut down for a bit. After that, they start risking
psychotic episodes. Hallucinations usually start between the third and fourth
days. Getting enough sleep before any open water swim will increase your
chances of success.

--- Page 234 Text ---
Motivations
While the example below concerns advanced open water swimming, the
information about motivations and goals applies to all open water swimmers.
Dave, my brother, coached David Yudovin; Dan Slosberg; another swimmer;
and me. He launched our open water swimming lives.
Dan Slosberg completed a single Catalina Channel crossing and became the
first person to swim a double. David Yudovin swam across the English Channel;
became the first person to swim across the Tsugaru Channel between Honshu
and Hokkaido, Japan; and became the first to swim between the islands of
Indonesia and between some of the Hawaiian Islands.
The other swimmer in our group was faster than any of us. He was incredibly
talented and churned out miles in rough waters without getting tired. When he
decided to swim across the Catalina Channel, he was in top shape, or so we all
thought. He pushed offshore and swam strongly for about ten strokes before
stopping abruptly.
Dave asked if he was cold, sick, injured, or scared. The swimmer said that he
was okay, he just didn’t want to do the swim. Without any hesitation, he climbed
out of the water.
Dave later tried to talk to him about it, but he never wanted to talk. He said
only that he felt he let us down and let himself down.
We tried to figure out what happened and came to the conclusion that he
psyched himself out. He was physically ready, but something wasn’t there
mentally. He left the salt water for over thirty years but reappeared to compete in
some long races. We still talk about him and wonder why he didn’t try again.
Maybe it was as simple as he just didn’t want to do it.
From all the years of watching open water swimmers, being on other people’s
swims, coaching, or advising from a distance, I’ve learned that whether it’s your

--- OCR from Page 234 Image 1 ---
Chapter 19
A SS. as

--- Page 235 Text ---
first swim or the fiftieth, whether it’s a short or long swim, the swim needs to be
your goal, not someone else’s. You can’t do these swims to make someone else
proud.
You have to swim because you want to swim, and you have to want to
accomplish it more than anything else. You also have to stay away from negative
influences—people who do not support your goals—and you need to have trust
in your coach and his or her ability to support your goal.
The mind plays an enormous role in the outcome of a swim.

--- Page 236 Text ---
SUCCESS
There’s nothing like training, preparing, researching, finding the best crew,
working with local people and learning from them, waiting for the tides and
weather, finally getting the chance to swim, and succeeding. It is thrilling. You
achieved your biggest goal. All the effort was worthwhile, and it is so satisfying.
The success boosts your confidence, and after a week or two to recover, you
begin to think about what you will do next. What few people talk about is the
letdown, even if you have succeeded.
Last year, Brad McVetta, a triathlete who became an open water swimmer,
completed the Catalina Channel crossing. His and his crew met with me for
lunch at a Mexican restaurant. His smile was so big, his eyes were bright, and he
was very happy with his success. His overall feeling was that he’d met his goal,
but he seemed reflective while ordering his food and waiting for it to arrive.
I asked, “How are you doing?”
He smiled and said, “The swim was the most difficult athletic event I’ve ever
done. It doesn’t even compare to a triathlon.” He was tired and sore, but not as
sore as he’d expected, and he said he felt a little sad that the swim was over.
I said, “That’s usual. You put so much effort into what you were doing, and
then it’s over. That big goal that was right before you for so long is now behind
you.”
Brad agreed and said, “You build up such a sense and vision of what it will be
like when you land, during training, that it can’t possibly be that way when you
do. And also during the swim, you are wrestling with thoughts of will you make
it, and then at some point your will just finally silences those negatives. And
shortly after, your mind arrives onshore, but you may be miles away. I never
intentionally looked up to see how close I was. My celebration started then, and I
swam for another thirty minutes, and by the time I landed, I was partied out.”
I asked if he had other plans looming on the horizon, and he said he was
thinking about other swims and other goals. I told him that was very wise. Many
swimmers get so caught up in achieving one big goal that they don’t have any
idea what they will do next, and they are lost for a while.
Brad needed to take a nice long hot shower and relax and savor all the things
that he enjoyed during the swim. I suggested that he write about it as soon as he
could, so that he wouldn’t lose the experience.
A few months later, I checked on him. He sounded even happier and more
satisfied with his Catalina accomplishment. He was working toward new goals

--- Page 237 Text ---
in swimming and in life.

--- Page 238 Text ---
SUCCESS IN UNSUCCESSFUL SWIMS
Sometimes the goal is further than you can reach.
When swims don’t work out, for whatever reason, it is normal to be
disappointed or even depressed. Sometimes it’s hard to figure out what didn’t
work and then decide whether to try again or do something else. It is very
disappointing and hard to deal with not completing something that you’ve
worked so hard on. It’s important to take time to process what happened.
During training for my first English Channel swim, I met Sandra Blewett in
Dover Harbor. Sandy was from New Zealand and had attempted the English
Channel the year before. She got within seven miles (11.2 kilometers) of the
French coast, where the current can be problematic, and she couldn’t make it in.
She was about six years older than I was. It was nice to have someone around
my age in the water. Most of the other swimmers were much older—in their
twenties, thirties, and forties. We talked about our training and our plans for the
swim.
Sandy was determined and focused, but once again, she didn’t complete the
swim. Once again, she got within seven miles (11.2 kilometers) of the French
coast and couldn’t finish. I felt really bad for her.
We still stay in touch, and recently, she asked if I would coach her to swim
across the Catalina Channel.
She worked very hard and did whatever I asked of her, but she was freaked
out by seaweed. I knew that she had to get over it. When you swim across the
Catalina Channel, you usually run into seaweed at the start and the finish. I told
her that if she was afraid, it would take energy away from her forward
movement.
We swam half-mile (0.8-kilometer) laps together off Santa Barbara, parallel to
the beach, near large kelp beds. Sandy was not pleased with the arrangement, but
I explained that we needed to do it so she would get used to it.
After a few laps, she began to relax, and then I coaxed her over to the kelp and
showed her how to reverse her stroke if she got tangled in it, how to grab hold of
it to pull herself forward, and how to float on top of it. We continued swimming,
and she got caught in kelp and jumped. She wanted to get out but knew that if
she did, I wouldn’t coach her for Catalina. She was annoyed at me, but she
continued swimming, and she got through the kelp. And then we dove under it
and made sure to clear it before we surfaced.
Sandy had it in her. She continued her training and completed the Catalina

--- Page 239 Text ---
Channel in something like fifteen hours. She was pleased with her success and
confident that she could complete the English Channel. She asked me to coach
her. We met in England and waited a couple of weeks for good weather and
tides. On the day of her attempt, the seas were calm and she was ready, but when
she got within seven miles of shore, she suddenly looked disoriented and her
stroke rate dropped to zero. We had to pull her out of the water.
We discussed her swim for a couple of days and couldn’t figure out what had
gone wrong. It seemed to be something about getting within the seven-mile (11.2
kilometer) distance. Her times had varied on the other attempts by two to three
hours. She physically had gone farther on the Catalina Channel. I suggested that
she try training in colder water, doing longer swims, using different foods, and
interval training to sustain a faster speed and get across the channel faster.
She was very disappointed, and I felt bad that she hadn’t made it. It seemed
like it was something physiological, though I wasn’t an expert.
Before she attempted another crossing, I told her, she had to figure out what
she needed to change. I suggested talking to other channel swimmers who could
offer more insights.
A few days later, I left to swim across Lake Geneva and heard two weeks later
that Sandy had attempted the channel again, gotten within seven miles (11.2
kilometers), and had to be pulled out.
After that, Sandy stayed in England for years. She worked as a swimming
coach and then on board a ferry boat that crossed the English Channel two to
three times a day. Something like twenty years later, she completed the English
Channel swim. It was her life’s achievement.
Mind-set plays an enormous role in whether you succeed. Trainees experience
a big letdown if they don’t complete their SEAL training. L. Tadeus recounted
his experience while working with the trainees:
We see it all the time with trainees who do not complete Hell Week. It
really boils down to mental resiliency. Somewhere in everyone’s mind
there is this very fine line—the normal. On one side of the line, a
setback motivates them to try harder—the “if knocked down, I will get
back up every time” mentality. On the opposite side of the line, a
setback demotivates them. The severity of the setback determines how
far away from the normal line they are pushed. In extreme cases, the
person can find disaster on both sides of the line. A person in the first
category may keep getting up when he should probably stay down. We
have noticed a recent trend of trainees concealing life-altering injuries
just to stay in the program. A person in the other category may never

--- Page 240 Text ---
try again or become so despondent that he becomes suicidal.
We see the whole spectrum here.

--- Page 241 Text ---
The English Channel Charts, Contacts, and Pilots
The English Channel, also known as the Strait of Dover, in a straight line is a
twenty-one-mile channel between Shakespeare Beach, England, and Cape Gris
Nez, France. The English Channel stopped the Spanish Armada and Hitler from
invading Britain. For many, the English Channel is the Mount Everest of long-
distance swimming, though there are more people who have climbed Mount
Everest than have swum the English Channel. Roughly 150 to 300 swimmers
will attempt the English Channel each year. In a good year, about 20 percent of
the solo swimmers and 60 percent of the relay swimmers reach the other shore.
The success of channel swims, like Everest climbs, is tied to nature. The
outcome of a swim depends upon the tide, sea, and weather.
An English Channel swim is planned around the phases of the moon and the
weather. During the month, there are two tides that occur: the spring tide and the
neap tide. The spring tide is when the difference between high and low water is
the greatest. It happens when the moon is either new or full, and the sun, moon,
earth are all in alignment. When this occurs, the gravitational pull on the earth’s
oceans is strengthened, which causes the greatest rise and fall in the tidal level.
The spring tide causes the water to move more and the current to be considerably
stronger.
The neap tide occurs at the first and last quarter of the moon, when the tide
generating of the sun and moon are opposite each other. This produces the
smallest rise and fall in the tides. The neap tides occur twice a month, when the
sun and moon are at right angles to the earth. The gravitational pull on the
earth’s oceans is weakened because the sun and moon come from two different
directions. During the neap tide, you have less water movement and weaker
current. A solo swimmer will attempt an English Channel swim on a neap tide. A
relay team comprised of two to six swimmers may make an attempt on the start

--- OCR from Page 241 Image 1 ---
Chapter 20
a

--- Page 242 Text ---
of the spring tide or the end of the spring tide.

--- Page 243 Text ---
TIDAL CHARTS
Spring tides and neap tides alternate, so that you will have two spring tides and
two neap tides in a month. One week the spring tide occurs; the next week, the
neap tide; the following week, the spring tide; and the last week of the month,
the neap tide. This tidal sequence is important because there are only two weeks
during the month when solo swimmers should attempt English Channel swims.
When you look at a tidal chart, the difference between high and low water
tells you how fast the tidal current is moving. If there is a great numerical
difference between high and low water, you will know that time period has the
strongest water movement between high and low water. You want to select a tide
when there is the least difference between high and low water.
For the English Channel, most swimmers begin their swim an hour before
slack water or just at slack. Slack water is the end of a tide, when the current is
tailing off and about to change to the opposite direction. The tidal change does
not happen all at once; it builds gradually, until it reaches full strength in the
middle of the tide, and then tapers off.
Before GPS, when swimmers swam the English Channel, their courses
resembled an inverted S, and this reflected the tidal movement. The direct
distance between England and France is twenty-one miles, but the first time I
swam the English Channel, I swam thirty miles; the second time, I swam thirty-
three. These were typical distances for the English Channel back then, but if you
look at a swimmer’s chart from a recent swim, the distance will most likely be
twenty-one to twenty-two miles. This accuracy has enabled swimmers to
complete their swims in much faster times.
YOU WANT TO SWIM THE ENGLISH CHANNEL?
Swimming across channels is far more complex than swimming alongshore.
Nature’s forces play larger roles in water movement in the ocean. Currents, tides,
temperatures, salinity, the earth’s rotation, and moving weather systems all have
a great impact. Landmasses pinch, deflect, accelerate, funnel, and buffer the
water’s path. Below the water’s surface, undersea mountains, rifts, reefs,
canyons, and sandbars, the irregular crucible of sandy beaches or rocky shores,
all alter the water’s motion.
You swim through hues of liquid gold and blue toward a distant horizon where
dreams and destiny meet. You feel the power of your arms and legs and the

--- Page 244 Text ---
winds and waves as they flow and rush everywhere around you. You swim
through darkness into light, cross shifting seas and calm ones. You focus on the
gains you make and overcome the losses. You dig deep into the sea, and into
your mind, resolving to overcome the waves, tides, and any barrier. With skill
and guidance from your crew, you reach beyond yourself. It is not a simple
swim. It’s not achieved alone or in haste. It’s done with conscious acts of
kindness and inspiration. And at the end, the celebration is shared with everyone.
It is with their skill and guidance that you have traveled beyond your reach, and
together you have spanned a great distance, shared hopes and dreams, and
crossed from one great landmass to another.
HOW DO YOU MAKE CONTACT?
Some of the questions that you will want to consider are: Is it important for you
to have your swim verified? Do you want or need to use an established
organization?
Most swimmers who swim across the English Channel become members of
the Channel Swimming Association (CSA) or the Channel Swimming and
Piloting Federation (CSPF). Both groups were established to authenticate,
observe, and verify English Channel swims. The CSA is the more traditional
association. Their rules require that a swimmer begin from shore and completely
clear the water to finish. Swimmers are permitted to wear only a swimsuit, a
swim cap, goggles, and some type of grease. The CSPF was established to cater
to the more unorthodox crossings, like rowing or canoeing, and they assist
swimmers wearing wet suits.
Both associations have a list of pilots to escort the swimmer for a channel
crossing. There are six active pilots in the CSA and nine active pilots in the
CSPF. Swimmers are required to have a pilot for their English Channel swim
and need to become a member of the Channel Swimming Association or the
Channel Swimming and Piloting Federation if they want to attempt the swim and
have it authenticated.
There are fees associated with becoming a member. Because the fees change
annually, it is best to check the websites: www.channelswimmingassociation.
com and www.channelswimming.net. The websites provide listings of and
contact information for pilots. Pilots are essential for English Channel swims and
are registered with the British Coast Guard. For safety reasons, the British Coast
Guard limits the number of boats that can assist swimmers to twelve a day.
Pilots charge fees to guide swimmers across the English Channel. The fees

--- Page 245 Text ---
vary. Pilots also charge according to the length of a swim—for instance, if you
are swimming a single crossing, a double crossing, or a relay attempt. They
require a deposit, a booking fee, and the remainder of the payment before or
after the swim, depending upon the pilot.
Many of the English Channel pilots are fishermen. Some learned how to fish
from their father and grandfather, and they know the English Channel like a
friend and an old foe. The English Channel pilots are like the Sherpas who guide
climbers up Mount Everest. The same way Sherpas know the mountains and
weather, the pilots read the tides, currents, weather patterns, and local conditions.
Pilots help swimmers determine the best day to swim. It is essential to find the
best pilot possible: the one who is the most experienced, qualified, and
compatible with the swimmer.
As in everything, some pilots are better than others. A miscalculation on the
part of a pilot can make the difference between completing and not completing
the swim. It is important to select a pilot who has taken swimmers successfully
across the English Channel.

--- Page 246 Text ---
SELECTING A PILOT
Because of the enormous interest in swimming across the English Channel, there
are more swimmers than support boats. Swimmers who decide they want to
attempt the swim need to book with a pilot two to three years in advance. The
best way to find a pilot is to ask swimmers who have completed the English
Channel about their experiences and whom they recommend. Most pilots will
book four to five solo swimmers and one relay team on one tide. Some pilots
will also double-book swimmers, promising the tides to two swimmers on one
day, hoping to get one swimmer across and then return to England to escort a
second swimmer in the same twenty-four-hour period. This is not the best
arrangement for either swimmer.
Weather plays a critical role in a swimmer’s opportunity to attempt a swim. If
you have booked the tide and are in the number one position, you have the first
chance of attempting the swim on the first day of the tide. If the weather is not
good on the first day, you are still number one on the tide; you have the option to
attempt the swim on the second tide; and if you can’t swim because of weather,
you have the option to swim on the third tide. If the weather still is not good, you
have the option for the fourth tide, and ultimately, the fifth day. If the weather
causes a no-swim, the swimmer can choose to go on the next set of available
tides, or when the pilot has availability. The swimmer discusses these options
with the pilot. The pilot fees are not refunded but are carried over to the
following year. Each pilot is in charge of his own bookings, and it is worth
asking before the swim what will happen if the weather causes a no-swim.
One of the problems with being in number two, three, four, or five position on
the tide is that you have less of a chance to attempt a swim; however, a fair
number of swimmers cancel their swims for one reason or another, and that may
open up a spot.
You need to determine which pilot will work the best with you. The pilot must
care about the swimmer. Most pilots take great pride in assisting swimmers and
do everything they can to help a swimmer succeed.
When I swam the English Channel, Reg Brickell Sr. was my pilot, and his son
Reg was his assistant. I was not as informed then as I am now. The Channel
Swimming Association gave me a list of pilots, and I went down the list until I
found someone who answered the phone.
By great fortune, it was Reg Brickell. Reg had taken the most record-breaking
swimmers across the English Channel, and even though I was only fifteen years

--- Page 247 Text ---
old, he took me seriously and understood that my goal was to break the world
records for men and women. He did everything he could to help me realize that
goal.
Reg watched over me intently for the entire swim, his fair brow often
wrinkled with concern, his blue eyes alternating between our course and me
swimming beside the pilothouse. He leaned over and checked on me countless
times and often smiled and gave me a thumbs-up that I was right on pace.
Toward the end of my first channel crossing, when we hit currents so strong that
we were being pushed backward, Reg told me I needed to swim faster, and for
the last hour, he cheered me on. He drew upon all of his experience and kept
working to find solutions to get me through the currents. He made all the
difference and enabled me to break the men’s and women’s world records twice.
His sons, Reg and Ray, have followed in his footsteps and are among the top
echelon of channel swimming pilots.
There are great pilots who care a great deal about swimmers and the outcome
of the swim, and there are pilots who are motivated by the business of the swim.
Steve Riches, who grew up in England and now lives in California, decided to
do a relay swim across the English Channel with a group of friends. All of them
were good swimmers. Based on a recommendation from another swimmer
friend, they booked with a pilot. They told him that they were not interested in
breaking the record for the relay. They just wanted to complete the swim.
During the relay crossing, Steve said that he stopped in the channel to look
around and take in the full experience. He joked with his friends who were
watching him from the boat, and they laughed together.
The pilot shouted at Steve to get moving, and when Steve didn’t, he began
cursing at him. The pilot said he was wasting petrol and the pilot’s time. Steve
said they had paid in full for the boat and pilot’s service, and they would take as
much time as they needed to do the swim and enjoy it. They did just that.
Looking back, Steve said, “It’s so important to have a good pilot, as it’s a
once-in-a-lifetime experience for most people.” If he were to swim the channel
again, he said, he would spend more time finding a pilot who was compatible
with his goals.
The English Channel pilots provide their service as a safety net for the
swimmer. They protect swimmers from shipping and fog, and guide them, and
are there for support. If swimmers are in trouble during a swim, the pilot makes
the decision about whether to let them continue swimming or to pull them out of
the water.
Some swimmers have their crew video them to enable them so later they can
examine what they could do to improve on future channel crossings. They have

--- Page 248 Text ---
found this to be a very effective tool.

--- Page 249 Text ---
Catalina and Other Channel Swims

--- OCR from Page 249 Image 1 ---
Chapter 21
J. SS.

--- Page 250 Text ---
THE CATALINA CHANNEL SWIM
The Catalina Channel Swimming Federation in California was established to
observe swims across the Catalina Channel, also known as the San Pedro
Channel. The federation observes and verifies Catalina Channel swims. The
group cares about the swimmers and does a lot to support swimmers and the
growth of the sport.
At this point, Catalina Channel Swimming Federation (see Sources for
website address; this page) works with two different pilots who own two
different boats. The two pilots are hired by the swimmers.
The setup for hiring escort boats for the Catalina Channel is very different
from that of the English Channel. With the Catalina Channel, a swimmer is
given one day to attempt the swim. Murph Renford attempted a Catalina
Channel crossing recently. He said that with the English Channel, “you are given
a window of opportunity. You get to swim on a tide, depending on your position
on the tide. And if you can’t get off before the neaps end, you have the option of
going on a spring tide or returning the following year to attempt the swim.” With
the English Channel swim, the pilot decides whether or not you will swim. With
the Catalina Channel swim, the swimmer has to decide whether or not to swim,
and you only get one day. If you don’t go on that day, you get your money
refunded and can come back the following year.
There is so much pressure, especially when you come all the way from
Australia. There’s a lot of expense in travel, hotels, food, and the crew.
My pilot told me that my swim would be in the most marginal
conditions he had ever taken anyone across, and I had to decide
whether to go. I decided to go, and the waves were breaking all over
the place. They couldn’t find a direction, and I couldn’t get a rhythm. I
would get slapped in the head by one wave and in the face by another.
Tony, my friend, was having a hard time just staying on his
paddleboard. We had a backup boat, and it was getting so thrashed that
the captain decided to return to the harbor.
After the first hour, I wondered what would be an acceptable time
for a failure. I really didn’t think I could keep going. But I did. I’m not
that mentally tough, but I kept going. I told Tony, “Let’s smash
ourselves for an hour,” meaning let’s sprint. Tony couldn’t believe it,
and he said, “Murph, slow down,” but I sprinted anyway.

--- Page 251 Text ---
Murph completed the swim in nine hours and thirteen minutes. He was very
satisfied with his success, but he would be the first to say that having only one
day to attempt a swim puts the swimmer in a bad position. He said, “You take
risks you would not normally take.”
The boat support guides the swimmer and, along with the crew, makes sure
the swimmer is safe. If a swimmer is being pressured to swim in far less than
ideal conditions, that is not a good situation.
In the last couple of years, there have been record numbers of people planning
the swim. This year there were more than fifty, and with the limited number of
tides and days of fair weather, it would be good for the sport if there were more
pilots available.
One friend decided to swim across the Catalina Channel with a relay. They
didn’t book a pilot with the federation because they didn’t want to pay the fees;
instead, they asked a capable friend to be their pilot. They swam under the
English Channel swimming rules, started the swim on a great day, and
completed it. Their swim was not verified by the Catalina Channel Swimming
Association, but that did not matter to them. They went through all the proper
procedures and knew what they had achieved. They were satisfied with their
success.

--- Page 252 Text ---
THE SANTA BARBARA CHANNEL SWIM
The Santa Barbara Channel, north of the Catalina Channel, is becoming another
popular place for open water swims. Scott Zornig, the president of the Santa
Barbara Swimming Association and a very successful open water swimmer who
has swum between many of the islands in the Santa Barbara Channel, has been
encouraging open water swimmers to swim there. Scott has labeled them “the
Southern California Eight,” consisting of swims from each of the Channel
Islands: Anacapa (12.4 miles; 19.9 kilometers), Santa Cruz (19.0 miles; 30.5
kilometers), Catalina (20.4 miles; 32.8 kilometers), San Miguel (25.9 miles; 41.6
kilometers), Santa Rosa (27.5 miles; 44.2 kilometers), Santa Barbara (37.7
miles; 60.6 kilometers), San Clemente (54.4 miles; 87.5 kilometers), and San
Nicolas Island (61.2 to 69.3 miles, or 98.4 to 111.5 kilometers, depending on
course). For more information about the association and the swims, take a look
at www.santabarbarachannelswim.org.
FINDING PILOTS FOR THE CATALINA CHANNEL AND OTHER
SWIMS
In 1972, Dave, my older brother, decided to swim across the Catalina Channel.
Dave was a nationally ranked swimmer and had trained with Don Gambril, who
had been the U.S. Olympic swim coach. In the 1970s there weren’t any pilots
taking swimmers across the Catalina Channel, but John Sonnichsen, who had
been involved in open water swimming since the 1950s, offered to help.
John had coached swimmers and had supported some professional swimmers
during the 1950s. He understood swimmers, as well as the tides and currents. He
knew how to read the water, and he could tell when swimmers were making
progress and when they were struggling.
John offered to help Dave find a competent pilot for his swim and to
accompany them on the swim and work with the pilot. John found Mickey
Pitman, in San Pedro, California. Mickey was a professional dive boat operator
who had worked for years with Lloyd Bridges on his television series Sea Hunt.
Mickey was more than a competent pilot; he was skilled at operating the boat for
divers, putting his boat in and out of gear, idling, and gearing down to the speed
of the diver. Just as important, he was eager to help Dave and realized that, given
his speed and training, Dave had the potential to break the world record for the
Catalina Channel. Mickey wanted to be part of that. For added safety, our father,

--- Page 253 Text ---
a physician and a former U.S. Navy corpsman who had been on ships in the
Pacific during World War II, went along to provide medical assistance if needed.
Our mother and a friend, Helen Olsen, went along to feed and watch over Dave.
Dave swam for nine hours and fifty minutes, and Mickey and John helped him
throughout the swim. With their support, Dave shattered the world record from
Catalina Island to the California mainland.
A few years later, Mickey took me across on my second Catalina Channel
swim, and with his support and Dave’s coaching, I broke the world record from
the mainland to the island.
Mickey’s son, John Pitman, and Mickey’s former partner, Greg Elliott,
mentioned previously, are now escorting swimmers on their Catalina Channel
swims. Both have had years of experience. Each man operates his own boat, and
through the years, many swimmers have hired these pilots to escort them on their
Catalina Channel swims.
You need to consider whether it’s more important to hire one of the most
experienced pilots for your swim, and have one day to attempt the swim, or find
another pilot who will work with you before the swim and give you a number of
options for the dates you will swim.
“If I were a well-resourced swimmer,” L. Tadeus said, “I would assist a boat
pilot and his crew in gaining the required experience outside the cabal of
established pilots. It requires a significant amount of relationship and trust
building. A pilot and crew can claim all the qualifications and experience in the
world, but uneducated swimmers would lack the required knowledge to gauge
their actual qualifications and experience. Swimmers who want to do this must
become educated in seamanship and boat handling as well.”
When planning my open water swims in remote parts of the world where
swims have never been done, I’ve found it a challenge to locate a qualified pilot.
If the person is intrigued with the idea of the swim, and eager to work with me
and combine his local knowledge with mine, it’s the start of a great team. One of
the key things I do is set aside between five and ten days to make that
connection; this gives me roughly two neap tides. I go through all the steps that
I’ve written about in this book, draw upon my past experiences, discuss the
project with my crew members who have been on past swims, and follow all the
recommendations that the SEALs have given me for finding a qualified pilot,
support boat, and crew.
There is a real advantage to having the pilot, crew members, and swimmer
understand from their own experience what each person does during a swim.
The SEALs realize that this creates some astounding synergy if the boat crews
are trained in swimming (at least at a basic level) so they understand why

--- Page 254 Text ---
swimmers do what they do and, more important, why they make the decisions
they make midswim. It helps tremendously if swimmers understand how the
pilot navigates the boat and supports the swimmer.
One of the SEALs’ advantages is that every instructor has been through what
all the trainees have been through. They also have had seamanship training.
Trainees have full confidence in the instructor’s ability to keep them safe and
moving in the right direction, because they know the instructors have the safety
piece under complete control.
You need to build trust with your pilot before the swim. Just because you’ve
paid for a pilot to escort you, you cannot expect that he will make sure all the
safety measures are in place. You have to make sure they are in place.
When you work with a new pilot, you take more responsibility for the
outcome of your swim. One of the reasons David Yudovin has been so
successful in swimming where no one has swum before is because he and his
wife, Beth, are sailors and have their captain’s licenses. They combine their
knowledge of swimming with seamanship, and because of this, David has been
able to accomplish swims that no one ever thought of attempting.
The SEALs would not plan a mission for a single day. They would not be
driven by a sense of urgency, because they realize that this leads to accidents.
They have backup plans and contingencies in place. They create what they
describe as a “bump plan.” If environmental conditions do not support an
operation on a given day, they plan to roll the operation to a future date with the
same plan, provided the target/opportunity is not a fleeting one.
You will want a bump plan so that you can make the swim another time if the
conditions are not favorable.
MEETING WITH PILOTS BEFORE HIRING THEM
~ Before you attempt any swim, meet with your pilot and discuss the swim in great detail and
create a basis of understanding.
~ A capable pilot will be skilled and be able to maneuver his boat.
~ He will be able to keep a swimmer as close to the escort boat as weather permits.
Two friends who swam the English Channel in different years had the same
pilot. Both swimmers told me the same story: The pilot let each swimmer get up
to a half mile (0.8 kilometers) ahead of the escort boat before he pulled
alongside. They believed the pilot was trying to save fuel and money at the
expense of their safety. Given the amount of shipping in the English Channel, the
possibility of losing a swimmer to hypothermia, and other potential risks, a pilot

--- Page 255 Text ---
should never permit a swimmer to be a half mile (0.8 kilometers) away from the
escort boat.
If the wind is blowing engine fumes onto a swimmer, the pilot should be able
to recognize that and reposition the boat so the swimmer is upwind of the fumes.
Diesel fumes can make a swimmer sick and cause her to pass out.
INSPECT THE BOAT BEFORE YOU SWIM
I asked L. Tadeus: How do you know what size boat/ship is required for a
channel swim? He said, “I wouldn’t pick a ship until I knew at least three things:
1) what the average seas are like for that time of year; 2) what the international
rules are for vessels regarding passengers; and 3) what the worst-case scenario
would be for the mission/event.
“Then I would pick a vessel based on her sea-keeping capability; passenger
capacity within international regulations and well above anticipated passenger
load; and finally, the equipment on board for medical response, along with crew
experience.”
Before hiring a pilot for a channel swim, inspect the boat to make sure it is
well maintained. Australian Des Redford taught me this. He was one of the
world’s top channel swimmers and among the most experienced English
Channel swimmers. For years, he competed with Irish swimmer Kevin Murphy
and British swimmer Michael Reed for the record for the most English Channel
swims. Des was also the coach of some of Australia’s top channel swimmers. He
coached Susie Maroney, the twenty-two-year-old Australian swimmer who
became the first person to swim (in a shark cage) from Cuba to Florida.
Des told me that on one English Channel swim, at the halfway point, the
boat’s engine broke. The pilot tried to fix the engine but couldn’t get it started.
Des did not want to climb out of the water or hang on to a rope, because under
Channel Swimming Association rules, he would have been disqualified. Instead,
he treaded water.
Eventually, he got cold and started swimming around the boat to get warm.
About an hour later, the pilot finally fixed the problem, and Des started
swimming again. This hour delay didn’t just lengthen Des’s time in the water; it
made the entire swim more difficult because he missed the tide and had to fight
for hours against strong current and headwinds.
The experience taught him to always check the boat out carefully and verify
that it is in good shape. He knew in advance that the boat wasn’t the best, and he
had heard of boats breaking down on other channel swims. He said it is

--- Page 256 Text ---
disappointing to be pulled out of a swim because of physical limitations, but it’s
worse when the boat breaks down when you are ready and you know you can
complete the crossing.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN ANY CHANNEL SWIM
Evaluate the risks and work on mitigating them.
Shipping lanes in any channel can be dangerous, especially when fog moves
in. In a twenty-four-hour time period, there are, on average, six hundred ships
moving through the English Channel and eighty to a hundred ferry crossings
between Dover, England, and Calais, France—one of the optimal landing points
for the English Channel swim.
The ships—tankers, cargo ships, passenger ships, fishing and sailing boats,
and leisure craft—all pose potential threats to swimmers. Tankers are enormous
ships with a capacity that can range from several hundred tons to several
hundred thousand tons. They operate in ocean channels, sailing through inland
waters, across great lakes, and along deep rivers and canals. They move at a
speed of up to nine knots through the English Channel. Some tankers are as long
as football fields, and because of that size and momentum, they cannot stop for
swimmers. The pilot’s job is to monitor shipping traffic and check in with the
UK Maritime and Coastguard Agency to figure out the speed of the ships and the
swimmer’s speed and determine if the swimmer can get safely through the
shipping channels.
Sometimes tankers alter the course of swimmers. Stella Taylor, one of the
great long-distance swimmers, grew up in England, became a nun, left the
convent, and moved to Florida. She began training for the English Channel in
her forties. In 1975 we met in Dover Harbor while we were waiting for neap
tides and fair weather. Stella had bright blue eyes, short chlorine-bleached-blond
hair, and a warm smile. She spoke with an eloquent British accent, and her eyes
twinkled when she told me she was forty-three and people had told her she was
too old to swim across the English Channel. I laughed and told her that I was
fifteen years old and people had told me I was too young to swim across the
English Channel. It didn’t matter to either of us, because we had trained hard and
we wanted to see what we could do.
We took off from Shakespeare Beach, near Dover, at about the same time,
with different pilots. Throughout the swim, we thought of each other, and our
pilots stayed in touch by radio and updated us on each other’s progress. When I
finished, my pilot radioed Stella’s pilot, who said that Stella was still swimming

--- Page 257 Text ---
strongly and that she had invited us to drop by for a cup of tea. It was so Stella.
Reg diverted our boat so we could meet her in the middle of the channel. She
had been treading water for half an hour, waiting for a tanker to pass. When we
reached her, she was bouncing in the tanker’s wake just as it passed. The
tanker’s propellers churned up cold water, but Stella said it was refreshing. Her
pilot tossed her a plastic water bottle filled with warm tea, and she said, “Will
you join me for a cup of tea?”
While our boats pulled side by side and her pilot poured us tea in cups, Stella
told us that she was feeling great and that she loved her pilot. He was doing a
great job. The pilot handed us the steamy cups of tea, and we toasted her, and
Stella said, “It’s so lovely to be in the English Channel having tea with you.” We
laughed, and her pilot said that we couldn’t keep her too long. He was afraid that
she would cool down.
We watched her swim toward France. Her pilot was right beside her on the
boat. We watched until they disappeared in the hazy horizon. When we arrived
in Folkestone harbor, I kept thinking about Stella and wondered how she was
doing. She swam for five more hours through rougher seas, with winds that
gusted to thirty-five knots, but she made it to France, and that night when she
returned to Dover, we met and celebrated. Two years later, she would swim
again and become the oldest woman to swim across the English Channel.
It is extremely important before a swim to look at the navigational chart that
your pilot will use. Study the chart, so you have the course in mind. Work with
your pilot to determine the best starting point. Often long swims are begun at
night, when you cannot see the shore well or the barrier between you and the
starting point. There are questions you need to ask: Are there rocks, reefs,
underwater obstructions, pier pilings, or kelp beds? Are there fishing lines or
buoys that you can become tangled in?
If the starting point is unfamiliar, it is worth getting to that area during the
daytime and go by Zodiac, kayak, or small boat to see if there are any
obstructions or other potential problems. The tide may be different when you
begin your swim, higher or lower than when you first checked the starting point,
and rocks that may be submerged during the day can pop out of the water at
night.
If possible, go ashore in a Zodiac, with an experienced driver, and begin your
swim from a sandy beach.
Once you have studied the starting point, based on your pilot’s experience and
your observations during the week before your swim, you will work with the
pilot to determine the best course. And you will plan your swim route.
Remember to use the SEAL action plan for organizing your swim.

--- Page 258 Text ---
CONTACT THE U.S. COAST GUARD
Let the coast guard (USCG) know a few days in advance that you are planning a
swim. You or your pilot need to give the coast guard the coordinates for the start
of your swim, your proposed route and speed, and your estimated time of arrival
and coordinates for that place. Often currents, tides, and winds will take you off
course, but if something goes wrong during your swim, the coast guard will
already have an idea of the course and may be able to render aid.

--- Page 259 Text ---
STAYING HEALTHY
There’s nothing worse than training for a big swim and being worried about
getting sick. While I love to travel, at times, sitting inside an aircraft cabin,
hearing people coughing and sneezing, makes me feel like I am captive in a
germ capsule. The problem is that the air inside the cabin is recycled and very
dry and can cause dehydration. It is good to replace fluids as needed throughout
the flight, but the dehydrating effect of the air can cause the nasal passages to
dry out as well. The rhinovirus likes to attach to the dried nasal passages and
infect the body. The last thing I want to do before a big swim is catch a cold.
It seemed to me that it might be possible to create a barrier to the virus with
Aquaphor—a skin moisturizer like Vaseline that is usually used for cracked lips.
I asked Dr. King if I could apply a tiny amount of Aquaphor inside my nose with
a Q-tip. She agreed that it was worth trying, that Aquaphor is water soluble,
though she did not recommend using Vaseline inside the nasal cavity because it
is not water soluble.
On my flight from Buenos Aires to Ushuaia, Argentina, where I planned to
train for my Antarctica swim, the idea was dramatically tested. A young man
with a full-blown head and chest cold sat down beside me and started coughing
hard. He didn’t have a handkerchief. When he caught his breath, he apologized,
and I told him there was no problem, but I was searching for a seat to move to,
one that would put a great distance between us.
Unfortunately, the plane was full. The man with the head cold sat beside me
for four hours and coughed the entire flight. Fortunately, I didn’t catch his cold.
My immune system might have been revved up because of my training—
exercise stimulates the immune system—but I think the Aquaphor helped create
a barrier to the germs.

--- Page 260 Text ---
BOATING SAFETY
One of the worst things that can happen on an open water swim is to have a
swimmer run over by a boat. It is every swimmer’s nightmare.
A few years ago a swimmer was in an open water race off Maui, Hawaii. He
was a very strong swimmer and had been training up to six hours a day, but
during the race, something went terribly wrong. The swimmer was having a
great swim and then was hit by the safety boat. His right arm was amputated
above the elbow. His left wrist and middle finger, thumb, and index finger were
severed.
The news about this accident spread rapidly through the open water
swimming community and everyone who heard about it wondered what went
wrong.
No one seemed to have any answers, so I asked L. Tadeus of the SEALs how
they would question the organizers to figure out what went wrong; put more
safety measures in place next time; and prevent something like this from
happening again. These are questions the SEALs would ask:
~ How long did it take emergency personnel to arrive on the scene?
~ Who responded to the mishap: lifeguards, EMTs, harbor patrol, USCG, other?
~ Was there an emergency action plan in place?
~ How long did it take law enforcement personnel to arrive on the scene?
~ Did the boater stop to help?
~ Did he take off?
~ Did he even notice he’d hit someone?
~ Why didn’t the support crew put themselves between the oncoming boat and the swimmer(s)?
(Were they protecting more than one swimmer?)
~ Did the support crew have any flags, day shapes, or lights indicating a swim was going on?
(USCG requires that boaters adhere to the “rules of the road,” regardless of licensing or competence.)
Does anyone know if the swim was published in the Notice to Mariners?
~ Did the boater have a radio?
These questions go to a more specific level and let you see how important it is
to think though every scenario when you are planning a swim.
SELECTING BOAT SUPPORT FOR AN ORGANIZED SWIM
The safety and success of any swim depends on the support pilots, their crews,
and the maintenance of their boats. It takes a lot of meetings and discussions

--- Page 261 Text ---
between event organizers and local officials, law enforcement, and U.S. Coast
Guard to support a rough-water swim or triathlon event.
SEALs train for high-risk missions and make sure they have the support they
need to ensure the safety of their group and complete their training mission.
Often they have to organize and coordinate with different military and
government groups to make sure everyone is working together.
When civilians are putting on an event, they should have the best boat support
possible. The only way (currently) to regulate pilots is to require specific
pilot/crew qualifications well in advance of events—and disallow unqualified
support boats. There should be interaction with local law enforcement agencies
and the U.S. Coast Guard. Ideally, there would also be a formal training program
in place. In spite of all the things you do to support and organize a swim, there
will be surprises, even for the pros.
L. Tadeus recounted a “nightmare dive” he witnessed not long ago:
It was Friday night before the SEAL reunion that was marked by an
uptick in maritime traffic in San Diego Bay. Needless to say, there
were lots of drunken boaters on the water.
We had thirty dive pairs in the water in Glorietta Bay, marked by
well-lit buoys for safety. Rather than avoid them, several boaters (with
passengers egging them on) took it upon themselves to approach the
buoys. My very squared-away dive supervisor loudly ordered the
support boats to ram any vessel approaching any dive buoy, and he
communicated his intentions in no uncertain terms to other boaters.
Our support boats were well lit—using red/white/red dive lights for
night—but most civilians don’t even know what this means.
All were kept safe, but it required active and direct intervention by
take-charge personnel on the surface. They even made contact with a
couple of boats.
The point of all this is: What would a given pilot do if a similar
situation occurred during a competitive swim event? My guess is he
would worry more about legal and financial liability than swimmer
safety, so my recommendation is to have all pilots supporting a swim
discuss safety procedures in advance with USCG and LLEA (local law
enforcement). They would require authority that we possess outright
and that they would not have without USCG and LLEA support.
That is what support boats and supervisory personnel are supposed
to do. I am guessing a significant lack of support contributed

--- Page 262 Text ---
substantially to the swimmer losing a limb.

--- Page 263 Text ---
ORGANIZED SWIM CONSIDERATIONS
A few years ago, Sandy Field, a triathlete and open water swimming friend,
competed in a race off Waikiki Beach in a field of five hundred swimmers. The
swimmers set off in one large group. The problem came when they had to swim
through a narrow opening between coral heads to reach open water.
Sandy was swimming at her pace when a male swimmer in his forties swam
over her back and pushed her head underwater. She came up sputtering and said
later that if she hadn’t been a strong swimmer, she could have drowned. She
shouted to the lifeguards and complained. At the end of the race, the meet
organizers, the male swimmer, and Sandy discussed what had happened.
The meet organizer didn’t do anything about it, which troubled Sandy,
especially since she’d been asked to help organize the Orangeman Triathlon in
Dana Point, California. She asked me what I thought. My first recommendation
was to establish new rules for the new event and announce ahead of time that
any swimmer who intentionally swam over another swimmer would be
disqualified.
I spoke with L. Tadeus to find out how he would make the swim in the
Orangeman Triathlon safer. He noted the problem with launching heats of five
hundred swimmers at a time, which made it impossible to keep track of
distressed swimmers and equally impossible to keep up with rule breakers.
“Even if it were possible to find a distressed swimmer, how would you provide
help in the middle of a group that huge, especially when there is a choke point?”
He recommended setting off no more than fifty swimmers at a time and
making sure the safety observers at a choke point paid serious attention. The
swimmers would be set off in thirty waves of fifty swimmers, staggered at thirty-
second-to-one-minute intervals.
He would also have a shepherd’s crook on hand for anyone who intentionally
harmed another swimmer and police on standby. He would charge anyone who
intentionally hurt another swimmer with assault, and create a blacklist like those
used at casinos to keep out the undesirables. “The race director, in particular, has
a responsibility to do something. Whatever he tolerates becomes the new rule.
He has to think about organizational leadership here, not just his profit margin.
Whoever runs the safest, most fair swims is going to profit the most. That’s the
one most new swimmers are going to flock to.”
Sandy announced the new rule before the start of the Orangeman Triathlon: If
anyone intentionally swam over or hurt another swimmer, the person would be

--- Page 264 Text ---
disqualified.
After the race was over, the triathletes gave the organizers feedback: All of the
swimmers had great swims, even people who did a triathlon for the first time.
The meet organizers were thrilled that people said it was one of the most
professionally organized triathlons. By redefining the rules for the swim and
requiring the triathletes to conduct themselves in a sportsmanlike fashion, this
swim may be the new example of the way the swim portion of the triathlon can
be run and, in doing so, encourage a lot more people to participate in and enjoy
the race.

--- Page 265 Text ---
Swimmer’s Utopia
Ways to Improve Training and Support and to Build Trust among
Swimmers, Support Boats, and Physicians
On open water swims, whether you’re doing short or long swims, it is important
to have not only competent support but also people you can trust. Trust is a huge
element in open water swimming. The pilot and crew’s decisions affect the entire
outcome of your swim.
What I’ve found during my open water swims is that the trust building begins
for me when I first meet the potential pilot and crew. We sit down and discuss
the swim together. Having done a lot of research beforehand, I am able to ask
enough questions to stimulate a discussion and ideas for the swim.
Usually, I have spent weeks, months, or even years corresponding with a
potential pilot and crew for an open water swim, so that by the time we meet, we
have already developed a relationship and begun to build trust. Most pilots and
crews are excited about supporting a swim and will volunteer to work with the
swimmer during training sessions so they can see how the swimmer does and the
swimmer can see how the pilot and crew work together. If something doesn’t
feel right about the pilot or crew, it probably isn’t right, and you should consider
another pilot. Your life may be in the pilot and crew’s hands.
The SEALs work on developing an atmosphere of trust between the trainees
and their instructors. This trust always begins at a very high level. The
instructors remain professional in everything they do. Unprofessional behavior
can and has damaged trust on occasion.
For the most part, the instructors have achieved what the trainees are striving
to achieve, so the trainees look to the instructors as examples of how to get there.
Not every instructor recognizes that immediately. Trust is further heightened
through test gates, which are established standards that every trainee must meet

--- OCR from Page 265 Image 1 ---
Chapter 22
A SS. as

--- Page 266 Text ---
to become a SEAL. Some of them are concrete standards; for example, in first
phase, trainees must run four miles (6.4 kilometers) in thirty-two minutes on
three of five runs. Another test gate, in second phase, might require a trainee to
properly ditch and don his SCUBA equipment and give himself a dive check
within five minutes—day or night. These test gates are crucibles that force
trainees to reach beyond their perceived limits. If the trainees give themselves to
the training and trust what the staff tells them, they achieve success. This trust
building occurs very quickly.
As the sport of open water swimming continues to grow and people decide to
take on greater challenges, I’ve wondered how we can emulate the SEALs. They
have honed their skills, mentored one another, and have physicians and medical
staff who support them. They have resources to help them train, plan missions,
and achieve their objectives.

--- Page 267 Text ---
Stewardship of the Waters
A few years ago, the Sheth Foundation invited me to speak about my swim in
Antarctica to an eminent group of seven hundred people in Mumbai, India. As
part of this journey, the hosts gave me the opportunity to explore Mumbai, the
Arabian Sea, and the subcontinent. What I discovered was that Mumbai was one
of the most energetic, diverse, and fascinating cities in the world, but also one of
the ten most polluted cities in the world. The Arabian Sea, which flows slowly
around Mumbai, is thick and opaque gray brown. When a heavy breeze sweeps
over the sea’s surface, the water smells of sewage, crude oil, chemicals, and
rotting fish. Friends and I took a boat ride from Mumbai to Elephanta Island, a
distance of 6.2 miles (10 kilometers), and the water never cleared.
At a reception after my talk, I met a tiny woman in her forties, dressed in a
brilliant pink, turquoise, and yellow sari and wearing large dangling earrings.
She had long dark brown hair and deep brown eyes. She was so excited because
she had recently completed her doctorate in environmental studies. I asked her
what she planned to do with her degree.
She said, “My goal is to clean up the Indian and Arabian seas.”
I asked her with awe, “How do you plan to do that?”
She said with great confidence, “Through education.”
Though it was mind-boggling to think that one person could make a
difference, there have been individuals around the world who made a
tremendous difference by informing people about their impact on the oceans and
the life within them. Rachel Carson educated people about pesticides, their
effects on the environment, and the need to manage them more wisely. Jacques
Cousteau, a former French naval officer, explorer, ecologist, innovator, scientist,
author, and researcher who codeveloped the Aqua-Lung, pioneered marine
conservation. Through his films and photography, he opened new worlds within

--- OCR from Page 267 Image 1 ---
Chapter 23
oo

--- Page 268 Text ---
the ocean for people, and gave them an understanding of the fragility of this
environment and the need to protect it.
More recently, Rivers Unlimited and the Sierra Club discovered that water
quality standards were about to be lowered on the Ohio River. They needed to
inform the local citizens about the damage this would do to the river and the
economic fallout. They invited me to swim across the Ohio with local swimmers
to make people aware of the plight of the river. The mayor of Cincinnati and the
local media got behind the event, and more than seven thousand people living in
Dayton, Kentucky, and Cincinnati, Ohio, contacted their local governmental
officials, asking them to vote to maintain the water quality standards on the
Ohio. The officials abided by their wishes.
Surfers often paddle for open water swimmers on their swims and have long
been aware of the effects of water pollution, especially the effects of runoff from
residential landscapes on their favorite surfing spots. They brought attention to
the increases in sediments in the water and reduction in ocean water clarity.
Surfers have seen the effects of runoff caused by fertilizers with increases in red
tides, algae blooms, bacteria, and jellyfish populations. Surfers, like swimmers,
run into debris and garbage and have seen it choke and kill marine animals. They
also understand that some pesticides used in residential landscapes poison fish
and seep into our food chain. As a result, they started the Surfrider Foundation, a
nonprofit environmental organization for the protection and enjoyment of the
world’s oceans, waves, and beaches for all people, through conservation,
activism, research, and education. They have had a positive impact.
Often these environmental movements begin with the efforts of one person.
Looking across the clear aqua waters of Monterey Bay today and watching adult
sea otters with their young bobbing in thick kelp beds, observing pelicans and
seagulls diving and plucking fish from the water, and seeing people swimming,
kayaking, and scuba diving in the bay, I find it hard to imagine that just over one
hundred years ago, Monterey Bay was nearly destroyed by overfishing sardines
and abalone, that tons of fish guts and waste were dumped into the water daily,
and that fumes from the scum floating on the waters were so bad that they turned
lead-based paints black. Sea otters that inhabited the bay were hunted nearly to
extinction.
It took only one person to realize that things could be changed. Dr. Julia Platt,
a marine biologist from Pacific Grove, a neighboring town, decided to do
something about it. She established a small marine refuge in Monterey Bay,
prevented commercial fishing, and limited the amount of noncommercial
extraction. She created a nursery “from where the tiny larvae may swim or be
carried by currents to all points along the shore and become attached, grow up,

--- Page 269 Text ---
and replace those taken.”
By 1962 the bay was no longer contaminated by sardine offal, the abalone and
sea urchins had increased in population, the sea otters had returned to Monterey
Bay, and the kelp forests on which abalone and urchins grazed rebounded.
Slowly, the bay has returned to its past glory. In 1984 Julie Packard, an
environmentalist and visionary, gathered together a team of experts and, with
their support and guidance, built Monterey Bay Aquarium in the “bones” of an
old cannery. The Monterey aquarium is now a place of research and
conservation.
Many of us are already doing simple things to tend the beach and waters.
When we find glass or fishing lines on the beach, we carefully pick them up and
throw them away so that swimmers, surfers, beachgoers, and wildlife won’t be
injured. When we see an abandoned hole in the sand dug by children who were
having fun making sand castles and moats, we stop for a few moments to fill it
in so that joggers or beach walkers won’t fall in and injure themselves—as one
friend did, who tore her ACL and needed surgery. We all have an impact on the
waters and beaches, and we all can make a positive difference in maintaining
their natural beauty.
As more people become involved in open water swimming and triathlons, my
hope is that we can find ways to be stewards of our beaches and open waters. As
you spend more time in the open water, you will find that you can feel the daily
and seasonal rhythms of the lakes, rivers, and oceans. You will see wave and
current patterns and changes. You will notice bird populations that migrate to
and away from your shores. You will notice changes in the landscape and
seascape, and through your journey, you will find friends who share the awe,
wonder, and fun of swimming through worlds of water. For many of you, the
open water will become a haven, a favorite place to visit, and many of you will
discover that no matter where you are in the world, it will always be a place
where you feel at home.
My goal was to share with you what I’ve learned from SEALs, scientists,
physicians, and friends so that you can swim better and more safely in the open
water. I hope you will love swimming beyond the waves and that being in the
vast open water will inspire the great ideas and exciting dreams that you work
toward and achieve.

--- Page 270 Text ---
Sources for Additional Information

--- Page 271 Text ---
INTRODUCTION
SEAL instruction:
www.sealswcc.com/navy-seals-buds-prep-docs.aspx

--- Page 272 Text ---
CHAPTER 1
Sports & Fitness Industry Association (formerly SGMA) study: triathlon.competitor.com/2011/08/
news/u-s-triathlon-participation-reaches-2-3-million-in-2010_36864
Triathlon Club of San Diego: www.triclubsandiego.org

--- Page 273 Text ---
CHAPTER 3
U.S. Masters Swimming: forums.usms.org/forum.php
Coney Island Brighton Beach Open Water Swimmers: www.cibbows.org
YMCA Open Water Swim Training (YOWST): contact Tim Treadwell at (631) 329–6884
East Hampton Volunteer Ocean Rescue: www.easthamptonoceanrescue.org
Santa Barbara Swimming Association: www.santabarbarachannelswim.org
Waikiki Swim Club: www.waikikiswimclub.org
Vision Quest Coaching: contact MarciaC944@aol.com
Tex Robertson Highland Lakes Challenge: www.HighlandLakesChallenge.com
October Lake Travis Relay: www.laketravisrelay.com
American Swimming Association: www.americanswimmingassociation.com
USA Triathlon: www.usatriathlon.org; to find a club, www.usatriathlon.org/audience/clubs/club-
listings/all-clubs-listings.aspx; to find a coach, www.usatriathlon.org/audience/coaching/find-a-
coach.aspx
Revolution3: rev3tri.com

--- Page 274 Text ---
CHAPTER 5
Shotz Energy Gel: shotz1.com/products/shotz-energy-gel
Creatine: www.umm.edu/altmed/articles/creatine=000297.htm

--- Page 275 Text ---
CHAPTER 6
American Lifeguard Association: www.americanlifeguard.com
United States Lifesaving Association: www.usla.org

--- Page 276 Text ---
CHAPTER 13
Wilderness Medicine by Dr. Paul Auerbach: www.amazon.com/Wilderness-Medicine-Enhanced-
FeaturesAuerbach/dp/1437716784
Safe Sea: www.bysafesea.com
U.S. Navy Diving Manual: www.supsalv.org/pdf/DiveMan_rev6pdf
Hawaiian Lifeguard Association: www.hawaiianlifeguardassociation.com

--- Page 277 Text ---
CHAPTER 14
Florida Museum of Natural History’s International Shark Attack File: www.flmnh.ufl.edu/fish/
sharks/isaf/isaf.htm

--- Page 278 Text ---
CHAPTER 21
Catalina Channel Swimming Federation: www.swimcatalina.com
HEAT AND COLD INJURY PREVENTION AND TREATMENT:
“Guidelines for Return to Work (Play) After Heat Illness: A Military Perspective,” Journal of Sports
Rehabilitation, 2007, 16.227–237, 2007, Human Kinetics, Inc., Francis G. O’Connor, Aaron D.
Williams, Steve Bilvin, Yuval Heled, Patricia Deuster, and Scott D. Flinn.
“Prevention and Treatment of Heat Stress Injuries,” Navy Environmental Health Center Technical
Manual NEHC-TM-OH-OEM 6260.6A, June 2007, section C2.3.12, pp. 10–11, Navy Environmental
Health Center Bureau of Medicine and Surgery.
“State of Alaska Cold Injuries Guidelines,” Alaska Multi-level 2003 Version, Prepared by:
Department of Health and Social Services Division of Public Health Section of Community Health
and EMS, Box 110616, Juneau, AK 99811-0616, 907-465-3027, fax 907-465-4101, www.chems.
alaska.gov.
SWIMMING TECHNIQUE:
Stroke work and drills for any age swimmer: Fundamentals of Competitive Swimming for 8 and
Under Swimmers Based on Breath Control, Balance, Sculling and Rhythm Skills, Laura A. Cox, PDF
(www.swimmingcoach.org/ecom/store/catalog/pdf/fundofcompswiminside.pdf).
SWIMMING EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURERS:
Adidas: www.adidas.com
Agonswim: www.agonswim.com
Arena: www.arenainternational.com
Dolfin: www.dolfinswimwear.com
Nike: www.nike.com
Speedo: www.speedousa.com
SWIMMING EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS:
Competitive Aquatic Supply: www.casswimshop.com

--- Page 279 Text ---
J.D. Pence: www.jdpence.com
Swim Outlet: www.swimoutlet.com
MANUFACTURERS OF TRIATHLETE WET SUITS:
Aqua Sphere: www.aquasphereswim.com
Blue Seventy: www.blueseventy.com
Orca: www.orca.com/category/wetsuits
Profile Design: www.profile-design.com
TYR: www.tyr.com
Zoot: www.zootsports.com
O’Neill: www.oneill.com
MAP OF SAN PEDRO (CATALINA) CHANNEL:
www.charts.noaa.gov/OnLineViewer/18746.shtml
U.S. NAVY SEALS:
www.sealswcc.com/navy-seals-buds-prep-docs.aspx

--- Page 280 Text ---
Acknowledgments
A very special thank you to Vicky Wilson, my editor, who recognized the
significance of the manual and helped shape it into a book that will help people
to swim more safely in the open water and to enjoy the sport.
Thank you especially to Martha Kaplan, my agent, whose thoughtful
comments enabled me to decide what needed to be included in the book and the
best way to convey the material to the readers.
At Vintage, I would like to thank Anne Messitte, Stephen McNabb, Kathleen
Cook, Beth Thomas, Claudia Martinez, Gabriele Wilson, Courtney Allison,
Jocelyn Miller, Russell Perreault, Jennifer Marshall, and Charlotte Crowe, who
contributed their expertise. They transformed the manuscript into a book and
helped make sure it reaches its audience.
Many thanks to my friends Emmy Griffin, Raylene Molvius, Jay Molvius,
Kathleen, Fessenden, Sandra Field, Deborah Ford, Dan Simonelli, Suzy
Sullivan, Ed Schlenk, Jack Deshaies, Kathy Kusner, Vicky Guilloz, Sophie
French, and Cindy Palin, all of whom offered invaluable suggestions.
Thank you to the scientists, physicians, lifeguards, and other experts who
generously contributed their advice and knowledge to the book.
This book would not have been possible without the help and support of the
U.S. Navy SEALs. With my great respect and deep appreciation, I thank you for
giving me the opportunity to observe and learn from you, to adapt your methods,
and to help open water swimmers.

--- OCR from Page 281 Image 1 ---
LYNNE COX

“THE GREATEST OPEN WATER SWIMMER.”
—SPORTS ILLUSTRATED