
--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
swimming science

-

a

4

optimizing training

and peformance -

i eee
—_— —
I ee
—

*
.

/.*

Edited by G.
i. -

Ve*p*V2*3*Cd

ae

= ~~ aw
Diag = Lp? *S*Cd

JOHN MULLEN

science to
improve your
technique

-_

--- Page 2 Text ---
s w i m m i n g s c i e n c e
Line weights..
CH1_SP2_G2

--- Page 4 Text ---
sw i m m i n g s c i e n c e
Edited by G . J o h n M u l l e n
optimizing training and performance
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS

--- Page 5 Text ---
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
© 2018 by Quarto Publishing plc
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission, except in the case of brief quotations in critical
articles and reviews. For more information, contact the University of Chicago Press,
1427 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637.
Published 2018
Printed in China
27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 1 2 3 4 5
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-28784-3 (cloth)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-28798-0 (e-book)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226287980.001.0001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Mullen, G. John, editor.
Title: Swimming science : optimizing training and performance / edited by G. John
Mullen.
Description: Chicago : The University of Chicago Press, 2018. | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017047739 | ISBN 9780226287843 (cloth : alk. paper) | ISBN
9780226287980 (e-book)
Subjects: LCSH: Swimming—Training.
Classification: LCC GV837.7 .S94 2018 | DDC 797.2/1—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017047739
This book was conceived, designed, and produced by
Ivy Press
An imprint of The Quarto Group
The Old Brewery
6 Blundell Street
London N7 9BH
United Kingdom
T (0)20 7700 6700 F (0)20 7700 8066
www.QuartoKnows.com
Publisher Susan Kelly
Creative Director Michael Whitehead
Editorial Director Tom Kitch
Art Director James Lawrence
Commissioning Editor Jacqui Sayers
Senior Project Editor Caroline Earle
Design JC Lanaway
Illustrators Nick Rowland and Rob Brandt
Copy Editor Gina Walker
Note from the publisher
Information given in this book is not intended to be taken as a replacement
for medical advice. Any person with a condition requiring medical attention
should consult a qualified medical practitioner or therapist.
Cover image Getty images/simonk

--- Page 8 Text ---
Contents
I Introduction 8
hydrodynamics
12
CHAPTER ONE
Tiago M. Barbosa
technique
40
CHAPTER TWO
Rod Havriluk
pool training
68
CHAPTER THREE
Rod Havriluk
dryland training
96
CHAPTER FOUR
Allan Phillips
nutrition
124
CHAPTER FIVE
Kevin Iwasa-Madge
injury prevention and rehabilitation
152
CHAPTER SIX
G. John Mullen
APPENDICES
Notes 180
Glossary 185
Notes on contributors 189
Index 190
Table of measurements 192
Acknowledgments 192

--- Page 9 Text ---
Introduction
Swimming is a popular sport for people of all ages. Children are often first exposed
when they learn to swim for safety, perhaps starting with splashing and then doing
turns and tumbles, enjoying the feeling of weightlessness and the novelty of being
in water. In fact, swimming is a truly unnatural activity for humans, requiring
swimmers to be instructed from their first stroke.
Unlike any other sport, swimming requires athletes to move as rapidly as possible
through a medium more dense than air. The density of water makes the precision
of every action important, as the additional resistance of an improper action greatly
reduces swimming velocity. Understanding the science behind swimming therefore
enhances both proficiency and enjoyment in the sport.
Since appearing in the 1896 Olympics, competitive swimming has seen vast changes
in style, form, attire, and location. At first, swimming events were held in open water,
before switching to the pool in 1908. Male competitors wore full-body swim suits up
until the 1940s, and the nature of fabrics available at the time meant this significantly
increased the drag on the swimmer. Lane markers were not used before 1924 and
starts weren’t incorporated until 1936. Swimming goggles were not allowed until
as late as 1976.
From across the globe, Swimming Science brings you the insights of leading experts in
physical, mental, technical, and tactical aspects of the sport. This book binds together
their significant findings with those of scientists who have parsed and studied every
element of swimming, most notably the original swimming scientist, Doc Counsilman.
Some discoveries were made in the nineteenth century and others as recently as this
year. A wide range of sciences is embraced here, as swimming involves a surprisingly
diverse array of disciplines. For example, at different stages of his career, Michael
a
Phelps—arguably the greatest male swimmer of all time—has relied on various aspects With the help of advanced
swimming science Michael Phelps
of science to hone his swimming to ever more impressive levels. His technical skills,
became the most decorated
strong work ethic, and training base were developed as a young swimmer in Baltimore, Olympian of all-time.
8 Introduction

--- Page 11 Text ---
Maryland. He has subsequently concentrated on physical preparation—a
key factor in his relatively injury-free career—and has cultivated a mental
toughness that has been severely tested under daunting pressure to win
multiple gold medals, resulting in amazing race finishes with Milorad Cavic.
Each chapter in this book deals with a different scientific discipline,
providing the reader with the background to better understand the sport.
A single solution doesn’t work for every swimmer, so instead of offering
a panacea or list of drills, the authors present science-based approaches
that enable one to tailor solutions to individual situations. Chapter 1,
Hydrodynamics, breaks down how the water interacts with the body
during swimming. Understanding how to stay streamlined in the water
and how various joint positions create torque and power is essential in
the sport. The biomechanics of effective swimming strokes are dealt with
in Chapter 2, Technique. Unlike in other sports, technique is the greatest
contributor to success in swimming, yet remains the area requiring most
improvement, for the majority of swimmers. Some aspects of technique are
not included due to space limitations, such as kicking, breaststroke timing,
freestyle and butterfly arm recovery, backstroke finishes, relay take-offs, and
10 Introduction

--- OCR from Page 11 Image 2 ---
Introduction

--- Page 12 Text ---
turns. Chapter 3, Training, discusses the physiological demands of
swimming and how training influences swimmers’ ability to deal with
these. Competitive swimming today requires a very high level of physical
performance, so Chapter 4, Dryland Training, delves into the science
behind improving fitness and strength through training outside of the
pool. Chapter 5, Nutrition, considers the optimal proportions of different
foods and fluids for swimmers to consume, to regenerate the body for
maximum performance. The sport’s heavy physical demands can lead
to injury, so Chapter 6, Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation, addresses
the best ways of preventing or minimizing the risks of tissue damage.
Finally, each chapter includes a detailed look at how specialized
g d
Graphically speaking This book will
equipment—such as that used in computer fluid dynamics, kinematics,
introduce you to the science that has developed
and electromyography—has impacted swimming science, and the
over many years of swimming practice, from
photographic Science in Action pages show how the professional the fundamentals of hydrodynamics and body
sport has benefited directly from the application of scientific principles. biomechanics to the latest developments in
swimming technology.
Whether you dip into the book for answers to specific questions or read
it straight through for an overview, Swimming Science reveals the science
at work when swimmer meets water.
11

--- Page 13 Text ---
Hydrodynamics play a significant role in the swimmer’s performance.
This chapter provides insight into how the water interacts with the
swimmer and the forces acting upon the body. It examines the way water
flows around the swimmer and how the forces produced can have an
impact on the energy expended during swimming, and hence on the
swimming efficiency. Swimmers, coaches, and researchers spend a good
deal of time trying to understand how to optimize these key aspects.
Cutting-edge devices are used to assess the swimmers, making them
more efficient and improving their performance. These assessments can
encompass the way the body is aligned, swimwear, or small details such
as the position of the fingers during swimming.

--- Page 14 Text ---
c h a p t e r o n e
h y d r o d y n a m i c s
Tiago M. Barbosa

--- Page 15 Text ---
What is the free What are the
body diagram forces acting on
of a swimmer? me when I swim?
To have a deeper understanding of the swimmer’s hydrodynamics Based on these external forces it is possible to model
we need to learn what the main forces acting upon the body the swimming stroke and make a rough estimation of the
are and how they interplay. Ultimately, swimming acceleration acceleration-time and speed-time curves within the stroke
and speed depend on propulsive forces, resistive forces, and cycle (see pages 32–33). The swimmer does not move at a
inertial parameters. Propulsive forces are those related to the constant speed—that is, with uniform motion. Instead, over
thrust and forward movement. Resistive forces act opposite a stroke cycle, there are positive and negative accelerations.
to the swimmer’s direction of displacement. The inertial The typical profile of these curves depends on the swimming
parameters are related to body features (anthropometric stroke, but in general positive accelerations occur when the
characteristics). thrust is greater than the drag force—for instance, during
the pull phase. On the other hand, acceleration is negative
Thrust is due to steady and unsteady flow patterns (see pages when the thrust is smaller than the drag force—for example,
16–17), and is the sum of propulsive drag, lift force, and the during the arm’s recovery. Therefore, one can swim faster
jet vortex (see pages 28–29). The resistive force is also known by increasing the thrust while keeping the drag constant,
as total drag force and results from three components—friction by keeping the thrust constant and decreasing the drag,
drag, pressure drag, and wave drag. Regarding the inertial or by both increasing the thrust and simultaneously
parameters, these include the swimmer’s body mass and decreasing the drag force.
the added mass of water.
F
drag
a
Free body This free body diagram shows
the applied forces acting on a swimmer’s body
while moving through the water at a steady speed.
The lengths of the arrows are proportional to their
magnitudes. Here, the forward thrust Fthrust and
backward drag Fdrag are equal in magnitude, so
there is no net force acting to accelerate the swimmer.
The upward force Fup is a combination of buoyancy
and lift resulting from the swimmer’s motion through
the water. It is equal and opposite to the downward
force Fmass, which is the swimmer’s weight.
14 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 16 Text ---
F
thrust
mass
F
F
pu
Forces and inertia
Thrust Drag force Inertial parameters
Fthrust Fdrag The two main inertial parameters are the
body’s mass and the added mass of water.
Thrust (positive force, acting in forward Drag force (negative force, acting backward)
direction) is the sum of several forces results from the collision between the A body’s inertial mass is a measure of its
produced by the swimmer, based on steady swimmer and the water molecules, and is resistance to changes in velocity—that is,
or unsteady flows. These are propulsive one of the main concerns for support staff to being accelerated. There is an inverse
drag (caused by pulling the hand directly (sport analysts), coaches and swimmers. relationship between acceleration and
backward), lift forces (caused by sculling The total drag force can be broken down mass according to Newton’s second law,
actions of the hands) and the jet vortex into three main components—friction drag F = m × a. Hence, the larger the mass m
effect, besides others. Thrust is produced (or viscous drag), pressure drag (also known of the swimmer, the smaller the acceleration
by both upper and lower limbs. as form or profile drag), and wave drag. a for the same mechanical force F. The
A great deal of effort has been made over mechanical force F is the sum of the thrust
Even though the surfaces of the feet and
hands are the most important, there is
the decades to understand the role of drag Fthrust and drag Fdrag.
in swimming and how to minimize its effects.
evidence that the forearm, upper arm, Total inertial mass is the sum of the
This can be achieved by improving swimming
shank, and thigh may also contribute to the swimmer’s mass plus the added water mass.
technique, designing new swimming apparel
production of propulsive drag, at least in When a body moves in water, it effectively
(such as swim suits, caps, goggles) and
some phases of the stroke cycle.1,2 drags some surrounding water with it. As a
building pools with different specifications
percentage of body mass, the added mass is
of depth and width.
roughly 24% for women and 27% for men.3
Newton’s second law equation becomes
F = (m + madded) × a. The heavier the
subject, the more added mass will be
carried, compounding the inverse effect
on acceleration.
15

--- Page 17 Text ---
What is the influence How does water
of water flow on a surround me as
swimmer’s displacement? I swim?
Water, like any fluid, is a substance that flows and deforms On the other hand, when the swimmer’s hands or feet
when forces are applied to it. The way water flows around a accelerate or change direction suddenly, unsteady flows are
swimmer affects several forces that act on the body, including created and this produces thrust. The speeds of the hands and
the thrust (see pages 28–29) and the resistance (see pages the feet increase over their underwater trajectories. The hands
18–19). Fluids, such as water, are characterized by a set of accelerate from their entry into the water to their exit, and the
properties. The most important are the density (mass or quantity feet also undergo accelerations as they kick up and down. In
of matter per unit of volume), and the viscosity (resistance to the analyzing these unsteady conditions, we can assess the water
movement of particles in the flowing substance). circulation around the body or the limbs and observe, for
instance, the generation of vortices.
The flow can be steady or unsteady. A flow is characterized
as steady when there are no changes in the fluid velocity and Flow can also be described as laminar or turbulent. The flow is
pressure at a given point of the body over time. Conversely, laminar when the layers of fluid are well organized and parallel
if these properties change, the flow is unsteady. Both steady to the swimmer’s body. If the water layers show a random
and unsteady flowsL pliany dee tewrmeinaingt rholetss in. .the production organization then this is turbulent flow.
of thrust.1
CH1_SP2_G3_A d
Let it flow When the layers of fluid are parallel and well organized with no
If the swimmer’s limbs are moving at a constant or almost
disturbance, the flow is said to be laminar. The velocity and pressure at each point are
constant speed, with no significant changes in direction, then
constant, and the water around the body appears smooth. Laminar flow happens
the water properties do not change over time and conditions are
typically at slow swim speeds—for instance, when gliding in the streamlined position
steady. Under these conditions, there are two propulsive forces,
at a relatively low speed (A). At higher speeds, the water surrounding the body
which are the drag and the lift produced by the hands and feet,
appears increasingly erratic, and swirling masses called eddies are observed, notably
whose speed and orientation are constant (see pages 28–29). on the body edgesC. TheH wa1ter _layeSrs aPre n2o l_ongGer p3ara_llel—Bthe flow is becoming
turbulent (B). The resistance drag in turbulent flow is significantly higher than in
laminar flow, so swimmers try to minimize turbulent flow as much as possible.
Laminar and turbulent flow
A B
16 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 18 Text ---
CH1_SP2_G1_Af
CH1_SP2_G1_Cf
CH1_SP2_G1_Bf
Flow analysis
a
Steady as you go We can visualize steady and unsteady flows using
threads, or tufts, attached to the body (right).2 The swimming stroke is
recorded on video and the tufts’ orientation inspected frame-by-frame. In
this way, changes in a limb’s velocity and direction can be observed over the
course of the stroke. Extreme changes in the tufts’ orientation from one frame CH1_SP2_G1_Bs
CH1_SP2_G1_As
to the next suggest that the flow direction changed suddenly. The arrows in the CH1_SP2_G1_Cs
diagrams represent the speed and direction of movement of the hand, elbow
and shoulder. Air bubbles or dye can also be injected into the water, and used
for qualitative analysis of flow (below).3 Here, a swimmer is performing dolphin
kicks. Each time the feet change from upward to downward movement, or
downward to upward, there is a cluster of air bubbles. This allows us to
observe the water circulation and vortices due to theL siunded ewn echigahngtes .o.f
direction of the accelerated limb. CH1_SP2_G2
redluohs fo noitcerid dna deeps
woble fo noitcerid dna deeps
dnah fo noitcerid dna deeps Speed and direction of hand
redluohs fo noitcerid dna deeps
woble fo noitcerid dna deeps Speed and direction of elbow
dnah fo noitcerid dna deeps
redluohYsE foK n_o1itGce_rid2 PdnSa_ d1eHepCs Speed and direction of shoulder
woble fo noitcerid dna deeps
dnah fo noitcerid dna deeps
YEK_1G_2PS_1HC
YEK_1G_2PS_1HC
Reynolds number
To assess how laminar or turbulent the flow is, we can calculate the A young swimmer around 12 years old has a Reynolds number of about
Reynolds number. This is a number that takes into account the water 2,500,000 at top speed.4 For the men’s 50 m freestyle world record
density, velocity, body length, and viscosity: holder, who is taller and faster, the Reynolds number is much higher, at
around 5,200,000.
density × velocity × length
Reynolds number = There is a critical Reynolds number value at which flow becomes turbulent.
viscosity
This depends on body shape but, as rule of thumb, flow becomes turbulent
at about 500,000. In swimming, the transition from laminar to turbulent flow
occurs somewhere between 500,000 and 10 million, so the flow surrounding
a racing swimmer cannot be considered to be laminar.5
Variations across species Blue whale
Human
Bacterium Small fish
10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1 1 10 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109
Reynolds number
Large fish
Dolphin
Graphics not to scale
17

--- Page 19 Text ---
How does drag force How does water
affect swimmers? resistance affect
how I swim?
When an object moves through a real fluid such as water, Wave-making drag reflects the energy needed to push the
which has viscosity and compressibility, there is always some water out of the way in swimming. As the body moves forward,
resistance to overcome. This resistance is known as drag, fluid tends to “pile up” at the front, while “hollows” are produced
because the object drags fluid particles along as it moves. in the rear, creating waves. Wave making decreases swimming
Drag forces acting upon the body are a major concern because efficiency in two ways—first, it takes energy that could have
they slow us down, and can significantly affect performance. been used for forward movement, and second, waves reflected
from the pool walls collide with the swimmer, transferring
The magnitude of the drag depends on a set of variables. The momentum and impeding performance.
higher the fluid’s density, the higher the drag, and this partly
explains differences in salt water and fresh water performances.
Water is about 800 times more dense than air, which means
d
Total drag The total drag on a swimmer D is the sum of the three components
drag impacts a swimmer far more. Body surface also affects
skin friction drag Df , pressure drag Dp, and wave-making drag Dw. That is, D = Df +
drag on a swimmer—the larger the area presented, the greater
Dp + Dw. Skin friction drag is directly proportional to swim velocity v, so it increases
the drag. But the top determinant is the relative velocity between
as the swimmer gets faster in a 1:1 relation. However, pressure drag is proportional to
the body and the water—the faster you go, the more resistance
v2, and wave-making drag is proportional to v3, so these components increase very
there is to overcome. Drag forces can be broken down into
steeply indeed with swim velocity.2,3 Pressure drag and wave-making drag in
three different components—skin friction drag (or viscous drag), particular are extremely sensitive to changes in body position, and so—because
pressure drag (or form drag), and wave-making drag.1 these factors increase so drastically at greater speeds—the faster the swimmer
goes, the more critical good technique becomes.
Skin friction drag results from interaction between the water’s
viscosity and the body’s surface. The water layer in contact with
the skin sticks to it, and travels at the same speed as the body,
so the relative speed is zero. This is the boundary layer. The
next layer of water is decelerated by this layer, and so on,
progressively further from the body. The higher the skin friction
drag, the more water is dragged (or trailed) behind the body.
Pressure drag is related to the pressure difference between the
leading and trailing edges of the body. At the front, there is high
pressure where fluid particles are compressed. Particles then
flow around the body, and eventually separate from the body
at the boundary layer separation point. Beyond this, the flow
reverses, producing vortices and a low-pressure region. The
pressure differential means particles tend to move from the
front to the rear of the body, “pushing” it backward—that is,
producing pressure drag opposing the direction of movement.
18 Hydrodynamics
garD
Drag forces acting on a swimmer
Wave-making drag
Pressure drag
Skin friction drag
Swim speed

--- Page 20 Text ---
Separation point
Streamlined form—smaller pressure drag
Boundary layer separation
occurs further back
Turbulent flow
Laminar
flow
Smaller
wake of fluid
dragged
behind body
Lower pressure
Higher pressure
Smaller pressure differential
Unstreamlined form—greater pressure drag Boundary layer separation
occurs further forward
Turbulent flow Laminar
flow
Vortices
Lower pressure
Larger wake of
fluid dragged
behind body
Higher pressure
Larger pressure differential
o
Pressure effects If there were no boundary layer
NEED TO KNOW
separation point, the pressures at the front and rear of the body
Total drag on a swimmer, D = ½ ρ v2 A Cd would be equal and hence the pressure drag would be zero.
where ρ is the water density, v is the velocity of the swimmer’s body relative to the water, The closer the separation point gets to the front of the body, the
greater the pressure differential and therefore the pressure drag
A is the projected frontal area of the swimmer’s body, and Cd is a dimensionless variable
will be. This means that the swimmer’s position in the water
(it has no units) called the drag coefficient.
significantly affects the pressure drag—a very well-streamlined
Because the total drag is the product of density, velocity, area and drag coefficient
position allows the separation point to occur closer to the rear
multiplied together, we can see that if any of these variables increases then the total drag
(top image). However, a poorly streamlined position, with limbs
will be greater. Of these, swimming velocity is the top determinant of drag for a swimmer, misaligned, causes the separation point to be further forward,
since the drag increases in proportion to v2. which much increases the resistance (bottom image).
19

--- Page 21 Text ---
e q u i p m e n t :
c o m p u t a t i o n a l f l u i d d y n a m i c s
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is a cutting-edge There are three main steps involved in performing an analysis
technique used to model a swimmer’s hydrodynamics. using CFD. During pre-processing, relevant data is collected
It has origins in the aerospace industry, and was only and prepared. Once these data are entered as a set of inputs,
applied in sports, notably in competitive swimming, then the simulation is run. Because of the complexity of the
during the late 1990s and early 2000s. Medicine, calculations, the simulation is run on dedicated software.
architecture, automobile design, and biology are Finally, during post-processing, the output of the simulation
other fields that frequently use computational fluid is retrieved. For a given set of inputs, the output will be always
dynamics. CFD allows us to visualize how fluid (air the same. But if we slightly change one or several inputs, the
or water) flows around a body, and to quantify key output changes accordingly, modeling the effects of those
parameters such as drag and propulsive forces. inputs in a real-world system.
The technique uses numerical analysis and a set
of algorithms to solve problems related to water A major advantage of CFD is that it is possible to test a wide
flow, which can help swimmers improve their variety of inputs, until the best result is reached, with no need
performance by understanding the effects of of physical experimentation or testing. So instead of inviting a
changing body position, for example, or of using swimmer to perform several trials in the pool under different
different garments (swimwear, goggles, caps). For conditions, we can simulate the effects in silico—that is, using
instance, CFD can be used to model the effects of software. Swimming performance depends on marginal
different finger positions on thrust, or of different changes in a given technique or characteristic. To investigate
swim suit designs on the drag force. the effects of such small changes, CFD is more accurate than
CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G3_LOWER_ARM
Flow simulation
a
Showing the flow Having imported the data and set the
inputs, the next step is to run the calculations. The time required
for this depends on the complexity of the model and domain, as
well as the computational resources available—it can take from
a few minutes to several hours. Once calculations are complete,
the results are checked—if errors are found, the inputs should
be adjusted and the simulation re-run. A visual representation
like that shown here highlights the body’s geometry and the
way the fluid flows around it.
20 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 22 Text ---
CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G1 SCANNER
experimental testing, if properly conducted. The main drawback Collecting data
is that if the inputs are not specific and accurate enough the
output will be less reliable. Hence, pre-processing is the step
that takes most time—making sure the inputs are accurate
increases the quality of the output. Another limitation of CFD
is the cost involved, because of the huge computational
resources needed to run the simulations.
CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G1_TECHCOMP
g o
Model subject In the initial pre-processing step, the swimmer’s
body is scanned, either in part or as a whole. This generates the model body
to be analyzed. Next, the domain is set. The domain is constructed from a
mesh of millions of small tetrahedral cells and represents the volume of
fluid through which the body is to move. Now the mathematical equations
used to model the chosen conditions are selected. For example, specific
algorithms can be used to model a certain orientation of the body in the
domain, swimwear of a particular roughness, or a swim lane containing
water of specific temperature, viscosity, density and turbulence.
CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G3_UPPER_ARM
Pressure drag analysis
CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G3_UPPER_KEY
a
Color by numbers Visual inspection of the flow is a qualitative
analysis. Besides that, it is also possible to retrieve quantitative data from
CFD simulations, such as the magnitude of the drag or propulsive forces,
and insights about the components that contribute to these. This graphic
shows the pressure drag on the forearm and the hand—a warmer color
denotes a higher pressure on the region, measured in pascals (Pa).
Pa
smaller greater
pressure drag pressure drag
–8500 –7500 –6500 –5500 –4500 –3500 –2500 –1500 –500 500 1500
21

--- Page 23 Text ---
Is drafting beneficial during Why is it easier
training, open water and if I swim behind
triathlon competitions? another swimmer?
Optimal distance
Anyone who has swum a few laps in a pool trailing behind
a fellow swimmer will have felt that the effort is less than
swimming alone. This happens quite often in training settings
in competitive swimming, but also in open water and triathlon
events. The lower effort perceived when swimming behind
someone is due to drafting effects. The aim of the drafting
technique is to diminish the drag force. This happens when two
or more swimmers are in a close group and fairly well aligned.
Behind the leading swimmer, a region of slipstream is created, 0.55 yd
(0.5 m)
as the wake of water is displaced at a similar velocity to that of
the swimmer. The slipstream region depends on the shape of
the body—humans do not have a perfect hydrodynamic shape
so the slipstream is rather big. The water flow over a swimmer’s
3.3 yd
body is typically turbulent (see pages 16–17), which means (3.0 m)
that the pressure in the slipstream region is lower than in the
surrounding environment, creating a perceptible “suction effect.”
5.5 yd
(5.0 m)
Drafting involves a swimmer staying inside the slipstream region
of a fellow swimmer in front. This is beneficial for both swimmers Cd ≈ 56%
when moving at the same speed. Because the swimmer behind 6.6 yd
is inside a region of lower pressure in the slipstream (a “suction (6.0 m)
region”), he or she needs to expend much less energy and
power to move forward.1 Wave drag may also be reduced in
close-in drafting positions due to the decreased relative velocity
of the disturbed flow close to the lead swimmer, which means
smaller waves are created by the drafting swimmer.2
Drafting is also a benefit for the leading swimmer. As we saw on Cd ≈ 65%
pages 18–19, pressure drag is due to the pressure difference
between the leading and trailing edges of the swimmer’s
body—a larger difference creates a greater pressure drag.
When a swimmer is trailing behind the leading swimmer, the
effect of the low-pressure region is reduced, and this therefore
decreases the pressure drag on the leader.
Cd ≈ 75%
22 Hydrodynamics
Cd ≈ 84%

--- Page 24 Text ---
)s/m(
yticolev
ekortS
CH1_SP4_G2_A
1.50
1.45
1.40
1.35
1.30
1.25
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
ycneicfife-xednil
ekortS
CH1_SP4_G2_B
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
htgnel
ekortS
)ekorts/m(
CH1_SP4_G2_C
2.25
2.15
2.05
1.95
1.85
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
ycneuqerf
ekortS
)nim/sekorts(
a
Different strokes Does drafting affect the swimmer’s stroke? To assess the
swim stroke, four parameters are often monitored: swim velocity, stroke frequency
(or cadence), stroke length (or amplitude), and stroke index (a higher stroke index
indicates more efficient swimming). A study comparing drafting and non-drafting
swimmers did find differences in the stroke mechanics.3 When drafting, the swim
speed, stroke length, and swimming efficiency (stroke index) were higher than
when non-drafting by 3.5%, 4.7%, and 7.15%, respectively. The drafting swimmers
kept a more even pace, and the stroke length and stroke index were enhanced
too. Conversely, the stroke frequency showed no significant difference between
conditions, especially in the last part of the swim distance. So, drafting appears to
keep the stroke mechanics more consistent during an event or training session.
g
Keeping your distance What is the optimal distance between swimmers to
enhance the drafting effect? The drag coefficient of the trailing swimmer increases
with distance, so that swimming 0.55 yd (0.5 m) behind another swimmer results
in a relative drag coefficient Cd of about 56% of that of the leader, while a gap of
6.6 yd (6 m) means the back swimmer’s Cd is about 84% of the leader’s.4 Drafting
at 0 yd (0 m) is no more beneficial than drafting at 0.6 yd (0.5 m)2—and in
fact being very close can be a liability as visibility is impaired by bubbles and 2.4
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 turbulence, and the possibility of hitting the feet of the leading swimmer affects
arm stroke trajectory. Based on this evidence, the distance between swimmers
should be more than 7.7 yd (7 m), so that all swimmers are under similar
hydrodynamic conditions. In open water events and triathlons, swimmers
should consider drafting when deciding race strategy, to help save energy.
CH1_SP4_G2_D
44
42
1.1 yd (1 m)
40
38
36
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
o Drafting
Side by side It’s also possible to reduce the drag coefficient by swimming
beside another swimmer, although the reduction is only one third of the reported Non-drafting
value achieved when directly behind the leader.2 The optimal position is about Average for drafting
1.1 yd (1 m) to the side and behind the leading swimmer, so that the drafter’s Average for
head is level with the leader’s hip. non-drafting
23
)s/2m(
ycneiciffe—xedni
ekortS
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.6
Swim distance (m)
1.85
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
)ekorts/m(
htgnel
ekortS
2.25
2.15
2.05
1.95
26
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
)nim/sekorts(
ycneuqerf
ekortS
1.25
44
42
40
38
)s/m(
yticolev
miwS
Drafting and stroke efficiency
1.5
1.45
1.4
1.35
1.3
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Swim distance (m)
Side drafting
NEED TO KNOW
Stroke index (SI)—the stroke index is an
overall index of swimming efficiency.
SI = velocity × stroke length

--- Page 25 Text ---
What is a swimmer’s What is the fastest
hull speed? I can swim?
Just like a boat, a swimmer moving over the surface pushes So what are the relative benefits of swimming between two
water out of the way. In doing so, the swimmer compresses crests at the hull speed, or of riding up the wave? It seems that
the water particles and creates waves. Creating waves takes a pace enabling the swimmer to be between two wave crests
energy, which is not then available to propel the swimmer is more economical. The swimmer is not repeatedly hitting the
forward. So the swimmer is wasting energy that could wave, and so is able to maintain a smooth and even pace.
instead be used for more efficient displacement. Sprinters, however, are willing to expend more energy to ride
the wave, using some of the wave’s momentum to help them
A wave has a crest (the highest point or peak) and a trough move forward. When this happens, wave drag drops
(the lowest, deepest point). The amplitude is the height of significantly and the speed can increase substantially.4
the wave, from the midpoint to a crest, and the wavelength
is the distance between two consecutive crests. As swimming Over a full freestyle swim stroke, the hull speed probably shows
speed increases, the wavelength of the created waves also some slight variations.5 During the arm’s entry the “hull” of the
increases. At a certain speed, the wavelength is equal to swimmer is effectively longer because the arm is fully stretched
the swimmer’s height or body length—this is known as the in front. Moreover, as the arm enters the water it may smash
swimmer’s “hull speed.” the wave. However, once the arm is in the water, fully immersed
and moving through its underwater path, the “hull” length
Taller swimmers have a higher hull speed. Younger swimmers, corresponds to the swimmer’s height once again, and the
because they are still growing, will increase their hull speed over head and shoulder immediately create a new wave.
time.1 Some researchers consider that, theoretically, the hull
speed is the maximum speed that a swimmer can reach.2 d
Riding the wave The hull speed is the speed at which the wavelength of
Others, though, have reported elite swimmers displacing at
the wave created by the swimmer is equal to the swimmer’s height or body length.
speeds higher than their hull speed.3 In such cases, the
On reaching the hull speed, the swimmer is “trapped” between the crests two waves
swimmer is effectively swimming uphill to ride the wave. (top). In order to exceed the hull velocity, the swimmer must swim “uphill” to climb
the wave and ride it, which requires more energy (bottom).
Swimming at hull speed (wavelength = body length)
Wavelength
Crest Crest
Trough
Amplitude
Body length
24 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 26 Text ---
Hull and race speed comparison
Men’s 400 m freestyle Men’s 50 m freestyle
Bronze medalist Vanderkaay 2% slower than hull speed Bronze medalist Cielo 22% faster than hull speed
Silver medalist Park 2% faster than hull speed Silver medalist Jones 20% faster than hull speed
Gold medalist Sun 0.1% slower than hull speed Gold medalist Manaudou 21% faster than hull speed
o
Energy economics Sprinters are not interested in being economical and saving Hull speed Race speeds
energy. They want to be as fast as possible, and they spend as much energy per
unit of time as necessary to achieve this. For long-distance and middle-distance
swimmers, on the other hand, being economical is a key factor. Comparing the hull NEED TO KNOW
and race speeds of the medalists in the men’s 400 m freestyle at the London 2012
The hull speed formula
Olympics shows that both speeds are similar. For the men’s 50 m freestyle, however,
the race speed is much higher than the hull speed. Florent Manaudou of France, who
won gold in the men’s 50 m freestyle, and Sun Yang from China, who was the gold hull speed = gravitational acceleration × body length
medalist in the men’s 400 m freestyle, are almost the same height—the French
6.283
swimmer is 6 ft 6.3 in (1.99 m) tall and his Chinese counterpart is 6 ft 5.9 in
(1.98 m). So, both have similar hull speeds. Nevertheless, Manaudou swam
21% faster than the hull speed, and Sun 0.1% slower.
Swimming faster than hull speed
25

--- Page 27 Text ---
s w i m w e a r
SCIENCE
IN ACTION
For more than a century, swimwear has been a major focus of interest,
research, and development for competitive swimmers. In the 1890s,
swimmers raced in wool swim suits covering the torso, part of the
thighs, and the upper arms. Not until the 1936 Olympics were men
allowed to compete in bare-chest suits, and men’s trunks became
the norm only around 1948. The 1950s saw the introduction of nylon,
and 30 years on, in the 1990s, manufacturers were able to produce
suits made of polyester and elastane, with superior durability,
elasticity, and drag properties.
The trend for drag-reducing swimwear moved into new technological territories
during the following decade, with suits made from non-textile materials in cutting-
edge, body-length designs. These suits, made partially or totally of polyurethane,
were tight fitting, compressing the body and reducing pressure drag. In addition,
the seams were bonded and water repellent, which also decreased the friction
drag. Some brands set panels in specific places in the suits to provide extra
compression and optimize water flow around the body. By the late 2000s, these
high-tech, performance-enhancing swim suits were hugely popular with top
competitors, and in 2008 and 2009, many world records were broken.
Then, amid concerns that such suits provided an unfair edge, they were abruptly
banned in 2010 by the Fédération Internationale de Natation (FINA). Although
high-tech suits were considered one of the best 50 inventions in 2008 by Time
Magazine, critics argued that they should fall into the category of “technological
doping.” Since 2010, swimmers must once again race in textile suits, and these
must have no zipping device, and cover the body only from waist to knee in men
and from shoulder to knee in women.
a
Suited up Michael Phelps of
Almost 130 world records were set in the high-tech era of 2008–2009, 50%
the USA and Paul Biedermann of
of which still stood following the Olympic Games in Rio in 2016, two Olympic
Germany take the start of the men’s
cycles after Beijing 2008.
200 m freestyle on 28 July 2009
at the FINA World Swimming
Championships in Rome, wearing
high-tech suits. Such suits could
reportedly lower racing times
by 2–4%.
26 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 29 Text ---
What are the thrust How do I propel
mechanisms in myself in the
swimming? water?
A swimmer’s displacement in the water depends on the relative Vortices provide another source of thrust. A vortex is a rotating
magnitudes of the forward force, or thrust, and the drag force mass of fluid, shed backward when a limb suddenly changes
acting in the opposite direction (see pages 14–15). In order direction, speed, or angle of attack, which results in a forward
to generate thrust, the swimmer must produce movement in acceleration of the swimmer. This is why a swimmer should
several body segments, notably the arm stroke of the upper rapidly transition between up-down and down-up leg motion
limbs, and the kicking action of the legs. In freestyle, about when kicking, for instance, and should accelerate the hand
10–15% of the total body speed is due to the kicking motion, under the water from entry until exit.
and the remaining 85–90% is attributed to the arm stroke.1
For the other competitive swim strokes, the relative
contributions of upper and lower body movements are not NEED TO KNOW
yet clear, because of lack of research evidence. However,
Hydrofoil
based on educated guesses, practitioners argue that the
A hydrofoil is a solid shape that produces a lift force larger than the
percentages will be roughly the same for backstroke and
drag force, when moving in water at a suitable angle. Because of the
butterfly, with the contribution of the kicking action being
hydrofoil’s shape and angle of attack, water flowing over the top moves
much higher for breaststroke.
faster than water flowing over the lower surface, which creates lower
pressure above than below. This pressure differential results in a lift
Both upper (arm, forearm, and hand) and lower limbs produce
force acting perpendicular to the water flow.
thrust, by three main mechanisms—propulsive drag, lift force,
and vortices. Propulsive drag is underpinned by Newton’s third
law of motion, which states that for every action, there is an
equal and opposite reaction. So when the water is pulled
backward, as a reaction the body is propelled forward. That
is why over the arm stroke the limbs rotate in the opposite
a
direction to the body’s motion—the arms move backward Cut and thrust Although there are alternative theories concerning the ways
so that the body moves forward. The larger the propulsive in which a swimmer’s forward thrust is generated, the current consensus among
surface, the more water is displaced and hence the higher the the scientific community is that propulsive drag, lift force, and vortices comprise the
three main mechanisms.2,3 These are not exclusive to humans—other animals
magnitude of this force. Another factor is the arm’s speed—
better adapted to the aquatic environment use the same strategies.4 The sum
the faster the displacement the greater the force produced.
of the propulsive drag and lift produce the resultant force. Studies quantifying these
forces have reported that in freestyle the propulsive drag reaches the peak value
If the arms moved in a straight line trajectory underwater, the
almost at the end of the underwater path (in a phase known as “upsweep”).5
propulsive drag would be the only force acting. However, elite
This happens because in this phase the hand is moving upward, outward, and
swimmers perform a curved arm stroke in order to produce a
backward—hence, the propulsive drag has a downward, inward, and forward
second force—the lift. Each arm acts as a hydrofoil, which—
direction. The lift force acts perpendicular to the direction of water flow across
because of the angle of attack resulting from the curved the hand, from the higher to lower pressure zone (that is, from the palm to the back
stroke—is able to produce lift. of the hand). So, the resultant of the two forces is in the direction of the displacement,
and the effective forward propulsion is maximized.6
28 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 30 Text ---
CH1_SP6_G3_CHART_C
Peak force
Resultant force
Effective forward propulsive drag
00 11 22 33 44 55 66 77 88 99 1100 1111 1122 1133 1144 1155 1166 1177 1188 1199 2200
Resultant force Effective forward propulsive force
Frame during underwater path of freestyle arm stroke
o
Frame by frame This graph shows the changes in the resultant force (red line) and the
effective forward propulsive drag (blue line) throughout the underwater path of the freestyle arm
stroke.6 The stroke was video recorded, and the path analyzed frame by frame. At the beginning
of the underwater path, a significant amount of resultant force is not used to produce effective
Generating forward thrust
forward propulsive drag (between frames 0 and 10). From the middle of the underwater path
onward the hand adopts an orientation that maximizes the use of the resultant force. The peak
force is reached by frame 16, toward the end of the underwater path.
Lift force
Vortex propulsion
Direction
Water over the top surface Resultant force
flows over a shorter distance, so it Direction of hand movement
has higher velocity and lower pressure.
The pressure differential between the two
sides of the hand results in a lift force.
Propulsive drag
Lift
Leading edge Trailing edge
Water over lower
surface flows over a The hand acts As the limb pushes back on the water,
longer distance, so it as a hydrofoil an equal and opposite force propels
Drag
has lower velocity and the body forward.
higher pressure.
Angle of attack
Right Hand
29

--- Page 31 Text ---
What is the effect of Should my fingers
the hand’s surface be spread out or
area on thrust? closed?
The hands are one of the main sources of thrust in swimming. Studies have shown that optimum finger position varies for
The hands and the arms are propulsive surfaces that act as different strokes, and during the arm’s motion. When water
paddles. Watching different elite swimmers racing reveals flows from finger tips to wrist, or in the opposite direction—
that they adopt a wide variety of finger and thumb positions for instance, during the hand’s entry and at the end of the
as they push the water backward. Some swimmers keep their underwater path in freestyle or butterfly—only trivial effects of
fingers close together, while others spread their fingers. The the fingers’ relative positions are observed.3 There is a slightly
thumb may be adducted, positioned near to the remaining higher thrust with the fingers grouped and thumb adducted.
fingers, or abducted, with a slight gap between it and the Conversely, if water flows from the thumb to the pinky finger
index finger. So what is the best finger position to enhance (as during the “insweep” phase), the effect is more obvious—
the hand’s thrust? the best position is with thumb adducted and fingers slightly
spread. When water flows from the pinky to the thumb (as
To investigate, an experimental test can be conducted using during “upsweep”), having the thumb slightly abducted and
different models of hands, or subjects performing trials with the fingers grouped is best. This flow pattern happens, for
the fingers in various positions, and the propulsive drag instance, after the hand’s entry during backstroke.
assessed.1 Alternatively, computational fluid dynamics
simulations can be used (see pages 20–21), which are In an aircraft, wing flaps increase the lift force—for instance,
significantly more reliable.2 In experimental testing, even during descent. Similarly in swimming, spreading the fingers
with consistent instruction, consecutive trials will yield slightly and abducting the thumb increases the lift acting on the
different results simply because of intra-individual variability. hand. While there isn’t one single best position for fingers
So, to study the marginal force changes produced with and thumb, as a guideline the fingers should be grouped or
different finger positions, a numerical simulation may be slightly separated. The thumb should be adducted during
the best option. water entry, water exit, and when the hand moves inward,
but slightly abducted when moving outward. Hence, the
fingers and thumb positions should change over the course
CH1 SP7 G2_A
of the swim stroke, depending on the water flow.
CH1 SP7 G2_B
Freestyle finger groupings
When the hand is under his
body (“insweep” phase)
During the hand’s entry, fingers should having the thumb adducted
be grouped and thumb adducted. and the fingers slightly
spread is the best option.
30 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 32 Text ---
CH1 SP7C GH11_ BSLPK7 G1_BLK
Fingers FiFnginegresrs FiFnignegresrs Fingers
widely sliwghidtleyly clsolisgehlytly closely
Finger and thu s m p b re p a o d sition sp s srperaedad grospurpeeadd grouped
Thumb Thumb
Thumb fully
fully fully
abducted
abducted abducted
a
Even spread The vast majority of swimmers
keep the fingers grouped, slightly spread or widely
spread.3 A slight gap between fingers (tip-to-tip)
may be a 0.13 in (0.32 cm) distance. A wider gap
tip-to-tip may go up to 0.25 in (0.64 cm). As far
as the thumb is concerned, it may be fully
Thumb Thumb
abducted, partially abducted, or fully adducted.
pThaumrtbi apalrltyially partially
A fully abducted thumb makes an angle of
abducted
abducted abducted
roughly 68° with the index finger, while a partially
abducted thumb is at an angle of about 30°.
If the thumb is adducted it is near the index finger.
So combining the three options for the finger
spread and the other three for thumb position,
we get nine possible arrangements.
Thumb Thumb
fully fully
Thumb fully
aadddudctuedcted adducted
d
Optimum arrangement Summarizing
research findings for a freestyle swimmer,3 for
optimum thrust generation the fingers should be
grouped and thumb adducted at entry, during
Fingers widely Fingers slightly Fingers closely
“insweep” the thumb should be adducted and the
spread spread grouped
fingers slightly spread, then as the hand starts to
move out and upward during “upsweep” the thumb
should be slightly abducted and the fingers grouped,
and finally on exiting the water the fingers should CH1 SP7 G2_D
CH1 SP7 G2_C
once again be grouped and the thumb adducted.
When the hand starts to move Before exiting, the fingers
out and upward (“upsweep” should again be grouped
phase), the thumb should be and thumb adducted.
slightly abducted and the
fingers grouped.
31

--- Page 33 Text ---
What is the energy How much energy
expenditure of do I use when
swimming? swimming?
One concern that competitive, recreational, and fitness-oriented stop-start traffic, the car uses much more fuel per mile or
swimmers have in common is the amount of energy expended kilometer than on the open highway. The same is true in
in swimming. The reasons for this concern, though, are swimming. Those swim strokes that enable the swimmer to
somewhat different depending on the swimmers’ motivation. keep a more steady motion, with fewer fluctuations in speed
For middle- and long-distance swimmers the goal is to swim and drag force, are arguably the most economical. Those that
efficiently, spending the smallest amount of energy possible involve repeated acceleration and deceleration, conversely,
at a given pace. Sprinters, on the other hand, aim for speed, impose additional mechanical work and therefore require
and spend a large amount of energy as quickly as possible higher energy expenditure.
in order to achieve it—that is, they have a higher power
output. Fitness-oriented swimmers are often more conscious
of body composition, and the balance between energy input
d
Stroke of work At a given pace, freestyle and backstroke are the most
(the food calories they consume) and output (the intensity
economical swim strokes. The third most economical stroke is butterfly, while the
of physical activity).
least economical is breaststroke. Note that the comparison among swim strokes is
always at the same pace. A recreational swimmer may feel that it is harder work
If you swim a few laps at different paces and using different swimming a lap of freestyle than a lap of breaststroke, but she probably also swims
swim strokes, it is clear that the “exertion” involved in each faster at freestyle. So, the perceived rate of energy expenditure is confounded by
case—that is to say, the energy output required—is rather the swim pace, which was not the same in the two trials.1
different. The amount of energy expended increases with swim
speed, regardless of the chosen swim stroke, because the
amount of drag to overcome increases with speed (see pages
18–19).1 Indeed there is a squared relationship between the
two (drag = constant × velocity2) meaning that a small increase
in the speed imposes a substantial change in the drag force.
So, the escalation of energy expenditure with speed is
explained by the increasing drag force.2
In terms of energy expenditure, freestyle and backstroke are
the most economical swim strokes, whereas butterfly and
breaststroke are the least economical. There are several
biomechanical reasons underpinning this.3 To help understand
the basic principle, think about a car in city traffic. Each time
the car accelerates and brakes, energy is used to change its
state of motion and overcome inertia. When maintaining a
steady speed on the highway, however, there is no need to
overcome inertia, so the movement is more economical. In
32 Hydrodynamics
)nim/ssam
ydob
gk/debrosba
2O
lm(
erutidnepxe
ygrenE
Energy expenditure for swim strokes
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
11..00 11..22 11..44 11..66
Swimming speed (m/s)

--- Page 34 Text ---
CH1_SP8_G2_FREESTYLE
CH1_SP8_G2_BUTTERFLY
CH1_SP8_G2_BACKSTROKE
CH1_SP8_G2_BREASTSTROKE
o
Drag race The amount of drag force acting on the
swimmer is lower for freestyle than for the other swim
strokes.1,4 This is because there is less change in the
swimmer’s mechanical impulse along the stroke cycle,
which leads to smaller variations in swimming speed for
freestyle. Speed fluctuation is higher for breaststroke and
butterfly than for the other strokes, as indicated by the
greater thickness of the shaded area in the upper graphs.3
33
)N(
ecrof
garD
Point during course of one stroke cycle (%)
deeps
gnimmiwS
Drag force and energy expenditure
0 50 100 0 50 100 0 50 100 0 50 100
140
120
Speed with drag Speed with drag
100 force of 80 N: force of 80 N:
1.39 m/s 1.75 m/s
80
40
60
Speed with drag Speed with drag
20 force of 40 N: force of 40 N:
1.21 m/s 1.51 m/s
0
0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1
Swimming speed (m/s)
Breaststroke Butterfly Backstroke Freestyle
Speed using 70 ml: Speed using 70 ml: Speed using 70 ml: Speed using 70 ml:
1.225 m/s 1.3404 m/s 1.420 m/s 1.575 m/s
Speed using 50 ml: Speed using 50 ml: Speed using 50 ml: Speed using 50 ml:
1.025 m/s 1.125 m/s 1.225 m/s 1.344 m/s

--- Page 35 Text ---
How efficient is How can I
propulsion at the swim faster in
competitive level? competitions?
For optimum performance, distance swimmers aim to achieve So, when the energy used to overcome drag and propel the
an economic and efficient technique. Coaches teaching novice body forward comprises a smaller proportion of the total energy,
swimmers also put a great deal of emphasis on efficiency—a this means a lower efficiency. For example, if a swimmer has a
good swimming technique means more of the energy available high stroke cadence (rapid limb movement) but is not propelling
to a swimmer is expended in overcoming the drag force and the body with speed, he is probably transferring a large amount
propelling the body forward, which in turn means a faster of energy to the water, and using a relatively small proportion of
swimming speed than for swimmers with poor techniques. the available energy to overcome drag and displace the body
forward—so he’s swimming with low efficiency.
There are various ways of expressing efficiency, but one of the
most helpful to consider is the propelling efficiency, because it Indeed, propelling efficiency can be assessed as the ratio
is strongly related to competitive level—elite swimmers show a between the speed of the body and the speed of the limbs.
far greater propelling efficiency than those competing at a lower A swimmer that is able to displace the body quickly using a
level.1–4 Mechanically, propelling efficiency is the amount of slower limb speed is more efficient than who one displacing
energy used to overcome the drag force and displace the body at the same speed but with a higher limb speed.
in the water, as a proportion or percentage of the total energy
required to overcome drag and to move the limbs, plus the d
Waste not Propelling efficiency can be expressed as a percentage—it is the
energy transferred to the water, which accelerates the water percentage of the total energy available to a swimmer that is used in overcoming
away from the body. (Note that some researchers assume the drag force and accelerating the body forward in the water. The bigger this
that the energy needed to move the limbs can be neglected.) percentage, the less energy is wasted, and the higher the swimmer’s efficiency.
Propelling efficiency Energy
used to move
limbs
Energy Energy Energy Energy
from respiration doing useful used to used to
in muscles work move water overcome drag
Wasted
Energy
energy
wasted as
transferred
heat
to water
Energy used to overcome drag
= x
Propelling efficiency 100%
+ +
Energy used to overcome drag Water energy transferred to water Energy used to move limbs
34 Hydrodynamics

--- Page 36 Text ---
CH1_SP9_G2_YOUNG
50
Efficiency comparison
40 60
50 50 50
40 60 40 60 40 60
30 70
30 70 30 70 30 70
20 80
20 80 20 80 20 80
10 90 10 90 10 90
10 90
100 100 100
0 0 0
0 100
Young swimmer Adult swimmer Olympic swimmer
% efficiency
Efficiency with training aids
% efficiency
o
Elite efficiency How does efficiency compare in a
Full freestyle
young swimmer, an adult competitive swimmer, and an stroke, no aids 60
Olympian, in freestyle, for instance? As you might expect,
efficiency increases with competitive level. Young
swimmers have the lowest efficiency, followed by adult
competitive swimmers, and the Olympians show the
Full freestyle
highest value. Young swimmers that compete on a regular
stroke, with fins
70
basis have an efficiency of about 30% for freestyle,2 while
an adult swimmer that races at national championships
displays an efficiency of roughly 60%,3 and for an Olympic
competitor the figure is around 70% efficiency.4
Full freestyle
a Boosting efficiency In training sessions, swimmers stroke, with 70
hand paddles
often use aids such as paddles or fins. On average,
performing sets of full-stroke freestyle with paddles or
with fins enhances efficiency by about 10%, from 60%
to 70%.3,5 Wearing a monofin and performing fully
Flutter-kick, with
immersed dolphin kicks with no arm movements achieves no arm stroke
35
an efficiency of almost 80%.6 Conversely, a flutter-kick
with no arm stroke (that is, not moving the arms) has
been reported as being only 35% efficient.1 Aids such as
fins and paddles increase the propelling surface, so a
Monofin dolphin kicks,
larger mass of water can be accelerated at the same limb
with no arm stroke
speed. This means a greater displacement for the same 80
energy output, and ultimately leads to a higher efficiency.
35

--- Page 37 Text ---
What is the effect of How can I reduce
wave resistance when wave-making drag?
swimming at the surface?
The total drag force on a swimmer is the sum of three How can this dolphin-kick motion be made as efficient as
components: the skin friction drag, the pressure drag, and possible? To quantify the efficiency of the wave motion we can
the wave-making drag (see pages 18–19). However, the relative calculate the Strouhal number. This is a dimensionless number
contribution of each component to the total drag is not equal— (it has no units of measurement) describing the oscillating flow
for a swimmer at the surface, wave resistance accounts for mechanisms at play—or the ratio between unsteady and
up to 50% of the total, while pressure drag and the skin friction steady motion (see pages 16–17). Basically, it is the ratio
drag account for 42.5% and 7.5% respectively.1,2 Obviously, between the speed of the kicking toes and the speed of the
swimmers want to reduce the total drag acting on them as body. The toe speed depends on the kicking frequency and
much as possible. So, many swimmers focus on strategies amplitude. The lower the Strouhal number the better, because
to decrease the primary source of resistance, which is the this means less propulsion is needed to reach a given body
wave-making drag. speed. It has been reported that national and international
level swimmers have average Strouhal numbers of 0.95 and
Counterintuitively, perhaps, the total drag force is much higher 0.79, respectively.3 Dolphins and whales show a Strouhal
at the surface than when a swimmer is fully immersed. When number between 0.2 and 0.4.4 Interestingly there is anecdotal
moving at the air–water interface, the body piles up and evidence of some swimmers reaching Strouhal numbers as
compresses the fluid, making waves. The wave-making drag low as 0.59 and 0.45.5
increases with speed, and because it is a cubed relationship
(see pages 18–19), marginal increases in speed impose very
significant increases in wave-making drag.1 For this reason, to
NEED TO KNOW
cut down the wave-making drag when racing, it makes sense
for a swimmer to stay immersed for as long as possible after
the start and after each turn, performing dolphin kicks.
Dolphin-kick motion
a
Kicking efficiency The dolphin kick produces
a pattern of vortices in the swimmer’s wake
(see pages 16–17). Increasing the kicking frequency
(so each kick is performed in less time) and/or
Wavelength
decreasing the kicking amplitude (so there is less
vertical displacement), for the same body speed,
results in a more efficient dolphin kick. When it
comes to performance, the kick has a much smaller
Body speed
impact compared to arm motions, but it pays to
make it as efficient as possible.
36 Hydrodynamics
edutilpmA
kicking frequency × kicking amplitude
Strouhal number =
body speed
For a certain body speed, when the wavelength
is shorter, the frequency increases.

--- Page 38 Text ---
NORMALFIGS
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0 1 2 3 4 5
Relative drag increase
)serteM(
ecafrus
woleb
htpeD
a
Full immersion When a swimmer
is fully immersed, the wave-making drag
decreases. For example, the average Swimming at surface
speed of the men’s 100 m butterfly
At swimming speed of 2 m/s
gold medalist at the Rio 2016 Olympics,
Joseph Schooling (Singapore), was
1.99 m/s (4.45 mph). This graphic
Fully immersed
shows that when swimming at this
speed at the surface the wave-making
drag is almost 110 N, but when the
swimmer is fully immersed this drops to
about 55 N, an improvement of around
CH1_SP10_G2
50%. This is why, after the start and the
turn, swimmers stay fully immersed for
Wave-making drag (N)
as long as possible, performing dolphin
kicks. However, they can’t stay
underwater forever—under swimming
rules, athletes must break the surface
before the 15 m mark.
a
Going deep The magnitude of the
wave-making drag depends on the level
of immersion—that is, how deep the
swimmer is. The maximum wave drag
occurs between the water surface and
a depth of 0.55 yd (0.5 m)—as a
swimmer goes deeper than this, the
wave drag decreases. But if she sinks
too deep, she will be spending too much
time in vertical displacement and take
longer to reach the opposite wall.
So a compromise is needed. Evidence
suggests that the effect of wave-making
drag is negligible at depths greater
than 1.8 times the chest depth of the
swimmer (the approximate distance
between the sternum and the spinal
column).6 Therefore, swimmers may
use this value as a guideline for their
optimum depth directly after the start
and turn—so for a swimmer of chest
depth 0.5 m, the ideal depth at which
to glide is 0.5 × 1.8 ≈ 0.9 m.
37
)m(
ecafrus
woleb
htpeD
Surface drag
110N
55N
200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0
Optimum depth
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0 1 2 3 4 5 Relative drag increase

--- Page 39 Text ---
How do head and arm How should I hold
positions affect active and my head and arms
passive drag when gliding? when gliding?
In the moments after take-off from the blocks at the start of Competitive swimmers use two different arm positions when
a race, or after a turn, a swimmer glides in a streamlined gliding. In one, the arms are forward, with the biceps against
position, carried by the momentum gained from pushing off. the ears. The second technique keeps the arms back, with the
Gliding occurs during some swim strokes too—for example, elbows close against the torso. In breaststroke, swimmers
breaststroke swimmers glide after the legs’ kicking action. adopt both arm positions. First, after the push-off, they glide
During the glide, if the limbs move, they will slow the swimmer keeping the arms forward. Then an underwater arm stroke is
down because the drag force increases. So, adopting a performed, and another gliding moment is held, this time with
streamlined position for gliding is a key-factor in maximizing the arms back beside the torso. Research indicates that having
the forward thrust. the arms forward imposes less passive drag on the body than
holding them back against the torso.3,4
In the streamlined position, all body segments should be
perfectly aligned, so that the resistance acting on the body is Putting the research data together confirms that the optimum
minimized (see pages 18–19). There has been much research position for streamlined gliding, imposing least drag on the
to assess the drag on the body when gliding in a streamlined body, involves holding the arms straight forward with the upper
position. When the body is gliding or being towed with no arms against the sides of the head, and facing the head to look
action by the limbs, this is “passive drag,” whereas if the limbs either directly down at the pool bottom or slightly backward.
are acting to propel the body this gives rise to “active drag.”1
To assess the effects of different head alignments when
2.0
gliding, researchers have measured the passive drag on
swimmers holding the head in different positions.2 A common
mistake made by non-expert swimmers is to look forward
1.9
when gliding. The head, instead of being aligned with the
body, is raised, disrupting the alignment. Competitive
swimmers, on the other hand, reduce drag by keeping the
1.8
head either in a neutral position aligned with the torso, or
dipped to look slightly backward.
1.7
1.6
a Up in arms An experimental study reported that the average
passive drag on gliding swimmers with their arms extended forward
was 32 N, while if the arms were back alongside the body it was 1.5
46 N.3 Drag coefficient was also significantly higher in the arms- 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2
backward position.4
38 Hydrodynamics
)s/m(
deeps
gnidilG
Arm position
Arms backward Arms forward
1.0
Drag coefficient

--- Page 40 Text ---
1.9
1.7
1.5
190 170 150
Passive drag (N)
)s/m(
deeps
gnidilG
CH1_SP11_G1 Coloured Suits
Head position
1.9
1.7
1.5
130 110 90 70 5500
Passive drag (N)
CH1_SP11_G1_KEY
CH1_SP11_G1_KEY
CH1_SP11_G1_KEY
Head looking forward
Head looking forward Head looking directly down (neutral)
o
Keeping your head down The passive drag on swimmers being towed at Head looking forward Head looking directly dowHne a(nde ulotorakli)ng slightly backward
different speeds, with the head in three different positions, was measured using an Head looking directly dowHne (ande ulotroakl)ing slightly backward
Head looking slightly backward
electromechanical device.2 As expected, the drag force increased with speed,
regardless of the head position adopted. Compared with the raised head position,
the drag was reduced by about 10% when the swimmer’s head was facing either
directly down, in a neutral alignment with the torso, or facing slightly backward. So,
when raised to look forward, the head seems to disrupt the laminar flow around the
swimmer (see pages 16–17). Another study also pointed out that head position had a
noticeable effect on the hydrodynamics, changing the wake around the swimmer.5
39
)s/m(
deeps
gnidilG
190 170 150 130 110 90 70
Head looking Head looking directly Head looking
forward down (neutral) slightly backward

--- Page 41 Text ---
This chapter on technique spans a variety of topics that are critical to
performance. Optimizing swimming technique requires consideration
of key physics concepts. Biomechanics is the application of mechanical
principles to body movement. Hydrodynamics is the study of a body moving
through water. The application of biomechanics and hydrodynamics makes
it possible to determine the exact body movements that optimize technique
for the fastest swimming. The chapter begins with information about how
a fundamental concept of hydrodynamics (the drag equation) explains the
relationship of key factors—swimming velocity, the active drag coefficient,
the cross-sectional area of the body, and propulsive force. Succeeding
spreads provide detail about the relationships of these key factors, and
how the application of biomechanical principles can help to optimize
performance. The chapter also considers the index of coordination, a
concept that has the potential to make swimmers much faster than the
current world records.

--- Page 42 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w o
t e c h n i q u e
Rod Havriluk

--- Page 43 Text ---
Do technique limitations Can I still swim
affect a swimmer’s fast with a poor
performance? technique?
If you look at the fastest swimmers, you won’t always see oxygen uptake during increasingly intense exercise (VO2 max).
the “prettiest” technique. Fast swimmers often have technique So a swimmer with apparently less than optimal technique
flaws—such as vertical and lateral head and body motion— may be winning races by offsetting such limitations with
that are obvious from above the surface. Unfortunately, these strength and conditioning. For example, a fast swimmer may
flaws are sometimes adopted by other swimmers just because have a drag coefficient that is only a little better than average,
they are characteristic of a fast swimmer. A thorough analysis but may compensate with a peak hand force over 300 N and
shows that fast swimmers also have technique limitations a maximum oxygen uptake over 70 ml/kg/min (milliliters of
that are not so obvious because they occur underwater. In oxygen per kilogram of body mass per minute).
addition, there are performance factors besides technique
that are not noticeable. There are other potential explanations for the race success
of a fast swimmer with an obvious (above surface) technique
Three factors explain a great deal about swimming performance: limitation that are not related to superior strength or
technique, strength, and conditioning. The impact of each conditioning. One possibility is that the swimmer benefits
factor depends on age, ability level, and race distance. from critical technique elements below the surface, which
We can’t rely on naked-eye observation (or even video) to are not superficially apparent. Another is that opponents,
accurately evaluate technique. Technique is best measured while displaying better technique above the surface, may
by the active drag coefficient (Cd) (see pages 58–59), which be hindered by more damaging technique flaws beneath the
includes data related to resistance, propulsion, and swimming water. Swimming is complicated and a valid explanation of
velocity. Hand force (F) is used as a gauge of strength, while a swimmer’s success requires a thorough and objective
conditioning is measured by the athlete’s maximum rate of evaluation of key performance factors. Nevertheless, studies
have shown that, on average, the advantage faster swimmers
a Not always perfect Fast swimmers do not necessarily have over slower swimmers is derived more from technique
have optimal technique. The swimmer on the left (A) than from strength.1 This means that swimmers at any level can
(representing Michael Phelps) has lifted his shoulders above improve performance significantly by focusing on technique.
the surface, which wastes energy. The biomechanical model
on the right (B) keeps the shoulders below the surface as
she recovers her arms, thus avoiding excessive vertical
motion. Position A is more natural, but position B
is more effective (see also page 51).
A
42 Technique

--- Page 44 Text ---
a
Technique trumps strength In a study to compare Contributions of strength and technique to performance
the relative contributions of strength (measured by average
Female swimmers
hand force, F) and technique (measured by the active drag
coefficient, Cd) to swimming performance, the magnitude
Butterfly
of the difference between faster and slower swimmers
in both F and Cd was calculated as an effect size.1
The mean effect size for Cd was almost double the effect
Breaststroke
size for F, indicating that faster and slower swimmers are
differentiated more by technique (Cd) than by strength (F).
Freestyle
The drag equation
⍴AC
d
v2 Backstroke
F =
2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Magnitude of effect size
where:
F = hand force (strength)
Male swimmers
⍴ = density of water
Butterfly
A = cross-sectional area of swimmer
Cd = active drag coefficient (technique)
v = velocity of swimmer relative to the water
Breaststroke
Measuring strength and technique
Freestyle
For making comparisons, strength, technique,
and performance are quantified—strength as
average hand force (F), technique as active drag
Backstroke
coefficient (Cd), and performance as swimming
velocity (v). Higher force values mean more 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Magnitude of effect size
propulsion, while a lower Cd indicates a more
effective technique. Conveniently, the drag
equation includes F, Cd, and v, and makes it
Mean effect size for drag coefficient, Cd
Mean effect size for hand force, F
possible to gauge the relative contribution of
component factors. The equation shows that F
(strength) is proportional to the square of velocity
(F ∝ v2) and that Cd (technique) is proportional to
the reciprocal of the square of velocity (Cd ∝ 1/v2).
B
43

--- Page 45 Text ---
How is hand If I pull and push
force related to harder, will I
swimming velocity? swim faster?
In swimming, the resultant propulsive force generated by the Increasing hand force becomes critical at higher swimming
hand during the stroke cycle is called the hand force, and it velocities, when a disproportionately large increase in hand
is directly related to swimming velocity—the greater the hand force is necessary to increase swimming velocity further. For
force, the faster the swimming velocity. The relationship is example, in the lower velocity range, a hand force increase
reflected in the drag equation (see page 43), which shows of just 2.2 lb (10 N) could result in a 0.11 yd/s (0.1 m/s)
that force (F) is proportional to the square of velocity (v). increase in velocity—but at higher velocities, a 4.5 lb (20 N)
We can write this as: force increase would be needed to yield the same step up in
velocity. So it’s essential to increase hand force throughout the
F ∝ v2 or v ∝ √F stroke cycle. To swim as fast as possible, a swimmer must pull
and push as hard as possible—there are training techniques
This theoretical relationship between hand force and swimming that can help maximize the propulsive force and speed.1
velocity has been supported with extensive research. Sensors
are worn on the swimmer’s hand to measure the pressure Of course, the relationship between force and velocity applies
differential between the palm and the back of the hand. to both the propulsive force (hand force) and to the resistive
The swimmer sprints 22 yd (20 m) toward the wall, where force acting against the body. So as a swimmer gets faster,
the camera is positioned, and data is captured over the last the resistance goes up, by larger and larger increments—
11 yd (10 m). Hand force is calculated from the pressure because the force is proportional to the square of the velocity.
data and the surface area of the swimmer’s hand. To maintain a constant swimming velocity, the propulsive force
must equal the resistance at any given velocity.
CH2_SP2_G1_FIG
a Use the force Hand force is directly related to swimming Line weights
velocity. In an investigation, two female and two male
swimmers successively increased their hand force over
a series of ten trials.2 Hand force and swimming velocity
were measured, using sensors as shown, and underwater
cameras. The graphs show how each swimmer’s velocity
increased with increases in hand force. Notice that the same
curvilinear relationship exists for males and females of all
ability levels. The graph lines are curved as shown because
v is proportional to √F. (If v were proportional to F, the
CH2_SP2_G1_KEY
relationship would give a straight line.) This means that CH2_SP2_G1_KEY
increases in F result in smaller and smaller increases CH2_SP2_G1_KEY CH2_SP2_G1_KEY
in v. For example, here, if F increases from 40 to 60 N, v
increases by about 0.2 m/s. If F increases from 140 to
160 N, v increases by only about 0.1 m/s. From this, it is F F a a s s t t e e r r f f e e m m a a l l e e
Slower female
Slower female
clear that as swimmers progress major increases in strength Faster female Faster male
Faster female Faster male
Slower female Slower male
are necessary to continue to increase swimming velocity. Slower female Slower male
Faster male
Faster male
Slower male
Slower male
44 Technique
)s/m(
v
,yticolev
gnimmiwS
Hand force and velocity
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Sensors
0.5 measure
hand force
0
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Hand force, F (N)
Faster male Faster female
Slower male Slower female

--- Page 46 Text ---
d
Different strokes Hand force analysis captures
underwater video synchronized with hand force data,
and provides useful information about a swimmer’s
technique. The shape of the force curve identifies
effective and ineffective elements of the stroke. Here,
the data show how rapidly flexing the elbow too late in
the stroke cycle produces a force loss on every stroke
of more than 60 N. 3,4 Note: The forces shown are
“normal” or perpendicular to the hand. Research
shows that there is a trivial difference between
normal and propulsive force.3
Right hand
45
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Underwater video analysis
Left hand
200
160
120
80
40
0
200
160
120
80
40
0
Time
Typical curves
Here, the rapid, steady Here, there is a major force
force increase shows the loss in the middle of the
swimmer is using strength stroke, due to a sudden
effectively throughout the change in hand path, pitch,
whole stroke cycle. or speed.
)N(
ecrof
dnaH

--- Page 47 Text ---
Can hip rotation Will I swim faster
increase propulsion if I roll my hips
in freestyle? side to side?
Many sports movements take advantage of the concept of Because of this, the hand force cannot be increased by the
“summation of forces” in which adjacent body segments force of torso rotation—rotating the hips harder or faster will
sequentially rotate in the same direction to produce maximum not increase hand force.
force. For example, in kicking—in the water or on land—force
is maximized by sequentially rotating the upper leg, lower leg, There is a natural tendency in freestyle to simultaneously move
and foot about the hip in the same direction. the hand and hips at the same time and in the same direction
(upward, toward the water surface), which may contribute
There have been attempts to apply the summation of forces to the misconception that hip rotation helps generate
idea to the arm and torso motion in freestyle swimming—for propulsion, but this upward hand motion would actually
example, suggesting that propulsion is generated by rotation generate less propulsion. A key factor in improving the freestyle
of the torso, in the same way that hip rotation helps a baseball push phase is to focus on simultaneously moving the hand and
batter hit the ball with greater force.1 In batting, however, the torso in different directions—the hand moves backward while
hips, torso, shoulders, upper arms, lower arms, hands, and the torso rotates upward.
bat sequentially rotate in the same direction to generate
maximum force. Conversely, in freestyle swimming, although In fact, the term “hip rotation” can be misleading from the
the timing of the push phase (where the arm moves from standpoint of either propulsion or resistance. It is more
beneath the shoulder back toward the feet) is usually appropriate to refer to “torso rotation,” which helps emphasize
simultaneous with upward hip rotation, the arm and hips that the shoulders and hips rotate together. Torso rotation
are moving in different directions. The arm motion is enables the swimmer to position the arm in the water with
perpendicular to the hip rotation—the hips rotate about the better leverage to generate more propulsion and makes it
polar axis (through the center of the body from head to feet), easier to recover the arm that is out of the water closer to
while the arm pushes backward in a horizontal direction. the body to reduce resistance and shoulder stress.
Batting torso rotation
g
In the swing In batting, the torso
rotates in the same direction (horizontal)
as the arm and bat. Body segments
rotate in succession to sum forces:
torso, upper arm, lower arm, hands.
With each successive body segment,
force increases until the ball is hit.
The red line indicates the side of the
Force production
torso as the batter rotates.
46 Technique

--- Page 48 Text ---
Swimmer 1
The push phase of freestyle is from when the arm passes under
the shoulder until it stops moving backward.
o
Pushing back Hand force analysis shows that force generation is limited when the
elbow moves upward to the surface with the upward motion of the torso. In the upper panel,
swimmer 1 cannot increase his hand force on the push phase because his elbow moves
the hand upward with the torso rotation, rather than backward. In the lower panel, swimmer
2 achieves more effective force generation during the push phase by pushing his hand back
while his torso rotates up. As he completes his push phase, his elbow is still submerged and
his force increases to a peak.
g
Turning up Contrary to the case for batting in baseball, for a freestyle swimmer the
torso rotates perpendicular to the hand and arm motion, rather than in the same direction
—the torso rotates about the polar axis (running from head to feet), while the hand moves
horizontally backward. This torso rotation cannot add force to the horizontal arm motion.
47
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Freestyle torso rotation Hand force analysis
Right hand
200
160
120
80
40
0
Time
Swimmer 2
Right hand
320
280
The push phase is effectively synchronized with upward rotation 240
of the torso on the same side as the pushing arm. 200
160
120
80
40
0
To maximize force on the push phase, the swimmer must push
the hand backward while the torso rotates upward on that side.
The elbow remains submerged as the push phase is completed,
and force generation peaks.
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Time

--- Page 49 Text ---
e q u i p m e n t :
s y n c h r o n i z e d u n d e r w a t e r
v i d e o a n d f o r c e a n a l y s i s
Most of the time, a coach analyzes a swimmer’s
technique with naked-eye observation from the pool
deck. This procedure generally limits the arm analysis
to movements above the surface as very little of the
underwater movement can be clearly seen. While
the above-surface movements are important, the Straps to hold
wires close to
propulsion is generated by the arm movements
swimmer's body
under the water. Even a video of the below-surface
movements still only provides a qualitative analysis
Sensor
—a quantitative analysis is necessary to determine
Wire to poolside computer
the effectiveness of the motion captured by video. Camera
A
Analysis using above-surface video began in the 1960s,
Wire to computer
but was fairly rare. Underwater video became popular in the
1970s, but by the end of the last century, even though video
This sensor is held in between the third
was more widely accessible, it was not extensively used—
and fourth fingers. The sensor measures
indeed, most swimmers are still not analyzed using video on the pressure differential between the palm
and the back of the hand. A is on the
a regular basis. This may be because coaches haven’t found
palm side in hand and is the positive
much benefit from the purely qualitative data it provides. port. Directly opposite A, on top of
the sensor, is the negative port.
More sophisticated systems of analysis were developed at
the beginning of the 21st century to integrate hand force
measurements with underwater video to instantly provide
quantitative data to coaches and swimmers. Immediately after A quantitative analysis is essential for a competitive swimmer
a swimmer completes a trial, the system calculates swimming because it provides the most complete and accurate
velocity, stroke rate, stroke length, and the active drag feedback. An analysis using only video shows the swimmer’s
coefficient, as well as numerous force and time variables. Hand movements—quantitative force data is necessary to determine
force data is vital because it is directly related to swimming the effectiveness of each movement. Evaluation of specific body
velocity. Studies on all four competitive strokes show not only parts helps swimmers understand the technique adjustments
that faster swimmers generate greater hand force, but also that necessary to swim faster. The video and force analysis make
when individuals increase their hand force, they swim faster. it clear to the swimmer how precise adjustments over small
The arm is responsible for most of the propulsive force and fractions of a second can produce dramatic increases in force
the hand contributes most of the arm propulsion. that translate to substantial performance improvements.
48 Technique

--- Page 50 Text ---
Poolside analysis
Camera and sensors are
Camera captures video of swimmer
hard-wired to a poolside
directly approaching end wall. g
computer, providing Instant feedback Synchronized
synchronized data for Sensor underwater swimming analysis systems
instant analysis.
instantly and simultaneously capture
underwater video and force data. A
camera focused down the swim lane
provides video images, while sensors
attached to the swimmer provide the
hand force data (see pages 44–45).
Immediately after a trial, the data can
be displayed to the coach and swimmer
on a poolside laptop.
Frame-by-frame data CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G5
d a
Results are in A frame-by-frame analysis of the
FileClientsDataDiagnosticsChannelsGainLimbUnitsRateSensorsHelp
synchronized video and hand force data clearly shows Forc 3 4 e 2 0 (N L ) eft Hand/Channel 1 Fly Re F c l o y v P e u ry ll Trial00.01.54 Rep2 0.02 d A i s h p a la n y d t f h o e rc f e o r a c n e a c ly u s r i v s e c s a f n o r a t ls h o e
24
the motions that generate force, as well as those that are 17 8 opposite hand in outline, allowing
0
unproductive or that lose force. The coach can use this coaches and swimmers to evaluate
information to reinforce effective technique elements and the pattern of arm coordination
(see pages 52–53)
help a swimmer change those elements that limit performance.
CH1_SP3A_EQUIP_G4
40Right Hand/Channel 2 Trial00.01.54 Rep1 0.76
32
14
17
8
0
FileClientsDataDiagnosticsChannelsGainLimbUnitsRateSensorsHelp
For 2 c 0 e 0 (N L ) eft Hand/Channel 1 Fly Re F c l o y v P e u ry ll Trial00.01.76 Rep2 0.26
120
90
60
30
0
Here, for example, a force analysis for an Olympic butterfly
swimmer is shown. Conventional wisdom might recommend
that novice swimmers replicate his stroke movements, since
he has clearly had some success. However, the hand force data
200Right Hand/Channel 2 Trial00.01.76 Rep2 0.24 shows that as he begins his butterfly pull with lateral motion,
120
90
60 he generates only a trivial amount of force. So this aspect of
30
0
his stroke form could clearly be improved. (The red bars show
the duration of minimal force—the ends of the bars are
synchronized with the video image.)
49

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 2 ---
yi, lg

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 4 ---
yan “ev @

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 5 ---
Trial[00.0

--- Page 51 Text ---
Can body undulation Will moving up and
increase propulsion down in the water
in breaststroke make my breaststroke
and butterfly? and butterfly faster?
Many swimmers have noticeable vertical motion in breaststroke When a swimmer emphasizes undulation, this inevitably leads
and butterfly. Upward movement of the head and shoulders to excess vertical elevation of the body, with two negative
is clearly evident, particularly on breathing strokes. Excess consequences. First, the angle of the torso presents a greater
upward motion to breathe typically results in excess downward resistive area in the direction of movement. Second, upward
motion after the breath, with the legs moving in the opposite shoulder movement slides the arms upward so that they
direction to the torso. This produces rotation about the hips, cannot generate as much propulsion. The natural tendency
and gives the appearance of an undulation or wave-like motion to go up and down on every stroke cycle causes more
from the head to the feet. resistance and less propulsion.
Swimmers typically acknowledge that they try to go up and There are three primary factors that can help a swimmer
down when they swim butterfly or breaststroke, or at least that minimize vertical motion, and so swim faster. First, keep in mind
they feel like they go up and down. A common misconception that the race is horizontal and not vertical to stay focused on
is that an emphasis on undulation is necessary for an effective moving forward. Second, breathe by extending at the neck
CH2_SP4_G1_C
butterfly or breaststroke, and indeed there are many commonly instead of lifting the head. And third, do not make a conscious
used drills that promote vertical motion and undulation. This is effort to vertically move the shoulders or hips. Minimum vertical
unfortunate as an optimal butterfly or breaststroke actually motion and undulation keeps the body relatively level and
involves minimal vertical motioCn oHr u2nd_ulSatioPn.4_G1_A provides a stable base of support for maximum arm propulsion.
Head and shoulder positions
CH2_SP4_G1_B
Breaststrokers often elevate the head The breaststroker here has her
more than necessary when breathing, body almost vertical when breathing.
as here. Above-surface recovery, In addition, her neck is not extended,
where the hands move forward above so she lifts her head far above
CH2_SP4_G1_D
the water, also contributes to excess the surface.
upward motion.
A B
50 Technique

--- Page 52 Text ---
Excess vertical motion under water
150°
220°
o
Under the surface When a swimmer has excess vertical motion of the
Position after arm entry
head and shoulders above the surface, it’s usually followed by excess vertical
motion below the surface. In these images, compare the head positions of
the butterflyer (left) and the model of optimal technique (right). Not only
does the excess vertical motion increase resistance and decrease propulsion,
but the angle at the shoulders is extremely stressful. This shoulder-stressing
position often causes shoulder impingement, which is extremely common
in competitive swimmers.
d
Moving on up Most swimmers have excess vertical motion in butterfly
and breaststroke. Even some of the world’s fastest swimmers lift their head
o
and shoulders considerably above the surface when breathing in breaststroke Keeping your head The left and center images here show butterfly
and butterfly. The model images below each example (A and B for swimmers in typical positions after arm entry. Both swimmers have submerged
breaststroke/C and D for butterfly) show how, instead of lifting the head their heads, one with the arms below the shoulders (left) and one with the arms
and shoulders to breathe, a swimmer can extend at the neck so the body above the shoulders (center). The model on the right has an effective arm entry,
stays relatively level and resistance is minimized. where the head is maintained at the surface.
CH2_SP4_G1_3
NEW_CH2_SP4_G1_1
In addition to excess vertical motion of the Here also the butterflyer has minimal
head and shoulders, this butterflyer is not neck extension so he has to lift his whole
extending his neck to breathe, which upper body above the surface to breathe.
means he must lift the head higher The consequent angle of the torso
above the surface. increases resistance.
CH2_SP4_G1_2
CH2_SP4_G1_4
C D
51

--- Page 53 Text ---
What is the optimal How do I time my
index of coordination? arm strokes to
swim faster?
In 2000, three scientists developed an index of coordination Some arm coordination differences in freestyle can be detected
(IdC) to quantify the relative positions of the arms throughout with the naked eye from the poolside. For example, some
the stroke cycle in freestyle.1 They explained that when one swimmers show noticeable phases of body acceleration and
hand begins to pull at the same time as the opposite hand deceleration. A negative IdC is usually responsible for these
completes the push, the arms are in opposition and the IdC fluctuations in body velocity.
is zero. If the pulling (entry) arm remains motionless while the
opposite arm begins the recovery, the IdC is negative (also Research has shown not only that a positive IdC differentiates
called “catch-up” stroke). If the pulling arm begins to generate expert and non-expert swimmers,2 but that for expert swimmers
force before the push is complete, this is called superposition, the IdC increases with increasing speed, while non-expert
and involves a positive IdC. Superposition maintains a more swimmers do not significantly change their arm coordination as
continuous source of propulsion, and therefore more constant they swim faster. That is, non-expert swimmers tend to maintain
body velocity (see pages 54–55). a negative IdC, even at higher swimming velocities.
Arm coordination for fastest freestyle
Index of coordination (IdC) %
–35 –30 –25 –20 –15 –10 –5
270
225
180
90
45
0
52 Technique
)N(
ekorts
rep
ecrof
dnaH
Negative index of coordination: Zero index of coordination:
If the pull (entry) arm remains motionless while If the pull arm begins to generate force as
the opposite arm begins the recovery, the IdC the opposite arm completes the push, the
is negative (also called catch-up stroke). IdC is zero (also called opposition).
135
0.2 second gap between left and right arm strokes No gap between left and right arm strokes

--- Page 54 Text ---
a
Technical challenge This table and the graphic
Arm Position gap Index of Average force Swimming
below show that superposition arm coordination is the
coordination or overlap coordination (IdC) per hand (N) velocity (m/s)
most effective way to make substantial increases in
maximum swimming velocity. However, achieving an Catch up 0.2 sec gap –20% 51 1.8
IdC greater than 30% requires superior technique with Opposition No gap or overlap 0 64 2.0
exceptional precision and control. Superposition 0.2 sec overlap +33% 85 2.3
Many swimmers have a negative IdC, for a variety of reasons. d Closing the gap The graphic shows how dramatically different the average
Some intentionally maintain the arm in a motionless position hand force and swimming velocities are for three different arm coordinations
after the entry, as in “catch-up” stroke. Other swimmers (assuming that the underwater arm motion is the same for all three coordinations).
unintentionally delay the start of the pull due to an ineffective The velocity values were calculated from the drag equation, using drag coefficient
and body cross-section values for an elite swimmer (see pages 42–43). The force
arm entry, wasted (lateral) hand motion, or fatigue. Swimmers
applied at each point throughout the stroke cycle is the same for each index of
usually complete the arm entry by straightening the arm parallel
coordination—the average hand force varies, however, because the time for one
to the surface. In the resulting position, it is only natural to “rest”
stroke cycle is different for each IdC. Notice that for this same application of force,
the arm and delay beginning the pull. In addition to increasing
the swimming velocity is greatest when the arm coordination is superposition. The
the time for each stroke cycle, “catch-up” coordination puts the
graphic shows a 0.2 s overlap in the force curves, for an IdC of 33%.3,4 While expert
arm in a position of poor leverage, making it difficult to begin
sprinters usually have a positive IdC of less than 5%, an IdC over 30% is possible and
the pull. As a result, the parallel arm entry position restricts a
necessary for the fastest swimming.
swimmer’s ability to swim with a positive IdC.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Positive index of coordination:
If the pull arm begins to generate force
before the push is complete, the IdC is
positive (also called superposition).
Left hand
Right hand
0.2 second overlap between left and right arm strokes
53

--- Page 55 Text ---
)s/m(
yticolev
ydoB
Why is it important to Is it ever good
maintain a constant to glide?
body velocity?
A relatively continuous source of propulsion produces a more one-tenth of a second. “Resting” after the arm entry during
constant body velocity for a more efficient use of energy. butterfly is also common. Swimmers often dive underwater
The result is the fastest swimming over a given distance. and glide to avoid immediately generating propulsion. In
While a constant velocity strategy is most efficient, it is also freestyle, it is extremely common for swimmers to complete
very demanding and very fatiguing. Consequently, swimmers the arm entry and then glide. It is so common that the strategy
naturally find ways to “rest” by gliding. even has a name—“catch-up stroke.” Considerable research
has shown the adverse impact of this “negative index of
Body velocity slows rapidly when there is no propulsion, such coordination (see pages 52–53).”1
as during the glide after a start or a turn. Most swimmers slow
to swimming velocity within one second. It is natural to keep In all four strokes—breaststroke, butterfly, freestyle and
gliding to avoid the effort of generating propulsion. However, a backstroke—it is important to maintain a continuous source
swimmer who glides for more than one second will immediately of propulsion. In breaststroke and butterfly, immediately
lose ground to competitors. It is essential to begin a propulsive beginning the pull after completing the arm recovery is critical.
action as soon as the body slows to swimming velocity. In freestyle and backstroke, it is important to coordinate the
arm motion so that one arm begins the pull as the other
There are often dramatic fluctuations in body velocity within arm completes the push. The only time that gliding is
each stroke cycle that indicate a swimmer would prefer to recommended is when the body is moving faster than
“rest” rather than maintain a more continuous source of swimming velocity—that is, for a fraction of a second
propulsion. For example, just as after a start or turn, swimmers immediately after a start, a turn, or possibly after the
often maintain a streamlined position after each stroke of kick phase in breaststroke.
breaststroke and lose more than 10% of their velocity in
CH2_SP5_G1 A
Start (dive and glide, no propulsion)
a 4.0 Losing speed fast The first graph shows how quickly the body velocity drops
after a start, with no propulsive motions of any stroke.2 The swimmer simply dives 3.5
in and, after the entering the water, glides for the time shown on the graph. In less 3.0
than 1 s, the body velocity has dropped below 2 m/s. The second graph shows how
2.5
body velocity changes during one breaststroke cycle.3 Here, gliding for only 0.2 s
2.0 results in a drop in velocity of about 20%. The third graph shows the data for one
butterfly stroke cycle.4 The velocity slows after the arm entry, as the swimmer 1.5
delays exerting much propulsive effort at the beginning of the pull. 1.0
0.5
0
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Time (s)
54 Technique
)s/m(
yticolev
ydoB
Fluctuations in body velocity
Start (glide only, no propulsion)
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Time (s)

--- Page 56 Text ---
CH2_SP5_G3 FIG B
CH2_SP5_G3 FIG C
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
CH2_SP5_G3 CHART B
270
225 180 135
90
45
0
0 0.40.81.21.62.02.42.83.23.64.0
Time (s)
)N( ecrof
dnaH
CH2_SP5_G3 CHART C
270
225 180 135
90
45
0
0 0.40.81.21.62.02.42.83.23.64.0
Time (s)
Positive index of coordination: continuous propulsion
Negative index of coordination: gaps in propulsion
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
CH2_SP5_G2
225
180
135Positive index of coordination: continuous propulsion
90 45
0
Left hand Right hand 225
180
135Negative index of coordination: gaps in propulsion
90
45 0
)N( ecrof
dnaH
)N(
ecrof dnaH
CH2_SP5_G2
225
180
135
90
45
0
Left hand Right hand
225
180
135 90
45
0
)s/m(
yticolev
ydoB
CH2_SP5_G1 C
Butterfly
3.2
2.8
2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.30.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
Time (s)
)s/m(
yticolev
ydoB
If the pull arm begins to generate If the pull arm begins to generate force
force as the opposite arm completes before the push is complete, the IdC is the push, the IdC is zero (also positive (also called superposition).
called opposition).
o Smooth and speedy The model shows different arm coordinations: zero (left),
and positive (right). Hand force curves for each coordination index are also shown.
Arm coordination is categorized by the index of coordination or IdC. A negative IdC
produces gaps in propulsion while the swimmer glides between strokes. With a
positive IdC, the hand force curves overlap for a more continuous source of
propulsion, and therefore more constant body velocity.
g Keeping it constant The top graph shows the swimmer has overlaps in arm
propulsion for a more continuous source of propulsion and a more constant body
velocity. (The force curves in solid blue are for the left hand and the force curves in
outline are for the right hand.) A positive IdC avoids gliding between strokes. In the
lower graph, the swimmer has gaps in propulsion which results in large fluctuations
in swimming velocity. With this negative IdC a swimmer has some “rest” between
strokes. However, the body velocity slows considerably and the swimmer loses ground
CH2_SP5_G1 B to competitors with a positive IdC.
Breaststroke
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
Time (s)
55
)s/m(
yticolev
ydoB
)s/m(
yticolev
ydoB
Index of coordination
Zero index of coordination Positive index of coordination
Left hand Right hand
Time (s)
Propulsion comparison
Positive index of coordination: continuous propulsion
225
180
135
90 45
0.0
Negative index of coordination: gaps in propulsion
Left hand Right hand
Breaststroke Butterfly
2.0 3.2
1.8 2.8
1.6
2.4
1.4
2.0 1.2
1.0 1.6
0.8 1.2
0.6 Glide Kick recovery
0.8 Beginning Arm and leg
0.4
of pull recovery
0.2 0.4
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
Time (s) Time (s)
)N( ecrof
dnaH
)N( ecrof
dnaH
270 270
225 225 180 180 135 135
90 90
45 45
0 0
0.40.81.21.62.02.4 2.8 3.23.64.0 0.40.81.21.62.02.4 2.8 3.23.64.0
Time (s)
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
225
180
135 90
45
0.0
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Left hand Right hand

--- Page 57 Text ---
m e c h a n i c a l a d v a n t a g e
SCIENCE
IN ACTION
Mechanical advantage (also called leverage) is a key principle related
to swimming fast. Swimmers benefit from leverage by changing the
angle at both the shoulder and elbow as the arm moves backward.
The concept of “leverage” applies because the attachments of the
muscles to the bones (via the tendons) form levers within the human
body. The mechanical advantage of most of these levers is poor due to
the fact that the tendon of the muscle (providing the effort) is attached
to the bone (lever) very close to the joint (fulcrum). A second factor
is that for much of the range of motion, a muscle is pulling on a bone
at a less than optimal angle.
Changing the angle at the shoulder improves the leverage of the upper arm. Once
the arm drops below the level of the shoulder, swimmers usually have a substantial
increase in hand force.1 Changing the angle at the elbow improves the leverage of the
lower arm—when the elbow begins to flex, hand force usually increases. Controlling
the angle at the shoulder on the arm entry and at the elbow at the beginning of the
pull is critical in all four strokes. Swimmers are at a rather extreme mechanical
disadvantage when the arm is above the shoulder or when trying to generate
propulsion with a straight arm.
Once the arm passes under the shoulders in freestyle, it is critical to maintain
backward motion of the hand (as shown in the photo opposite). Since the push
phase of the arm is synchronized with the upward torso rotation, swimmers tend to
naturally let the hand slide up with the torso. If a swimmer maintains backward
motion of the hand, the elbow will be submerged far into the push phase and
the hand will generate maximum force. An increase in strength increases the
potential effort and, therefore, also the mechanical advantage.
a
Maximum leverage This shows how
Olympic gold medalist Cesar Cielo bends
his elbow to benefit from leverage. In
addition, his elbow is submerged far into
the push phase so that he can continue
to push back with a great deal of force.
56 Technique

--- Page 59 Text ---
What is the drag What is the best
coefficient? way to evaluate my
swimming technique?
Swimming technique is usually evaluated by naked-eye A quantitative analysis is essential to determine technique
observation from the pool deck. Most of the time, coaches improvements. Measurement of the active drag coefficient Cd
only have an above-surface (or limited below-surface) view of before and after a training intervention is the only way to really
a swimmer’s technique. While this kind of qualitative evaluation determine if a swimmer’s technique has improved. The Cd
during a workout is the standard and can effectively address simplifies technique evaluation to a single objective number,
a number of technique elements, a quantitative analysis is as opposed to a subjective assessment.
necessary for a complete and accurate evaluation.
According to the drag equation (see pages 42–43), the square
The drag coefficient (Cd) is generally considered the best of the swimming velocity v2 is inversely proportional to the drag
measure of the effectiveness of technique. The passive drag coefficient Cd. So as the Cd decreases, swimming velocity
coefficient measures drag on a static body pose (when gliding increases significantly. At a swimming velocity of 1.86 yd/s
in a streamlined position, for example) and the active drag (1.7 m/s), for example, a 0.1 improvement in the drag
coefficient measures swimming motions. For either passive coefficient results in an improvement in swimming velocity of
or active drag, the “shape” of the body determines the Cd. 0.11 yd/s (0.1 m/s). At a swimming velocity of about 2.19 yd/s
(2.0 m/s), a 0.1 improvement in the drag coefficient produces
The lower the active Cd, the more effective the technique. an almost 0.22 yd/s (0.2 m/s) improvement in the swimming
Most swimmers who “look good” have a Cd that is below the velocity. Because of the relationship between Cd and swimming
average of 1.0 (for freestyle). There are many top Olympians velocity, even the most technically proficient swimmers can
with a Cd that is only a little better than average (such as 0.9). benefit by continuing to improve their technique.
A Cd below 0.7 is rare.
Stroke speed comparison
a
Drag down, speed up These graphs
Butterfly Backstroke
show active drag coefficient (Cd) plotted
against swimming velocity for 40 male and
40 female university swimmers. For each
stroke, there is a statistically significant
relationship between drag coefficient
and swimming velocity – the lower the
Cd (the better the technique), the higher
the velocity.1
Females
Males
58 Technique
)s/m(
yticolev
gnimmiwS
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Active drag coefficient, Cd
)s/m(
yticolev
gnimmiwS
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Active drag coefficient, Cd

--- Page 60 Text ---
NEED TO KNOW
1
v2 α
Cd
where v is the swimming velocity and Cd is the active drag coefficient.
59
)s/m(
yticolev
gnimmiwS
Swimming velocity and active drag coefficient
2.4
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
Average cross-sectional
area 1000 cm2
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
Average force 140 N
1.1
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
Active drag coefficient, Cd
o
Tiny improvements bring big rewards
There are proportionally bigger improvements
in velocity with each incremental improvement
(decrease) in active drag coefficient Cd. For
example, a decrease in Cd from 1.0 to 0.9
increases velocity by 0.1 m/s (green triangle).
In comparison, a Cd decrease from 0.7 to 0.6
increases velocity by almost 0.2 m/s (red triangle).
Freestyle Breaststroke
So, even if a swimmer’s technique is “really good,”
substantially faster swim speeds can be achieved
by continuing to improve and reduce Cd. The data
points for this graph were calculated from the
drag equation (see pages 42–43), which shows
the relationship of swimming velocity (v) and
active drag coefficient (Cd), assuming an average
force (F) of 140 N and a body cross sectional
area (A) of 1000 cm2 (typical values for an elite
male swimmer). The value for water density (ρ)
is constant.
)s/m(
yticolev
gnimmiwS
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Active drag coefficient, Cd
)s/m(
yticolev
gnimmiwS
1.0
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Active drag coefficient, Cd

--- Page 61 Text ---
What impacts performance Should I master
more, resistance or streamlining or stroke
propulsion? technique first?
Resistance and propulsion are equally important to performance. Swimmers often lose force in the middle of the freestyle stroke,
Whether a swimmer should first master streamlining (to usually because of a sudden change in direction of the hand
decrease resistance, or drag) or pulling motions (to increase motion. Adjusting the hand path so that changes in direction are
propulsion) depends on the individual. For example, if a gradual can minimize or even eliminate force losses. Since hand
swimmer’s legs are below the torso, causing an increase in the force is directly related to swimming velocity, eliminating force
body cross-section, adjusting technique to lift the legs could losses can produce substantial improvements in performance.
cause a sudden improvement in performance by decreasing Force losses at the end of the stroke in freestyle are also
resistance. Other adjustments to decrease resistance may common. Most swimmers let the hand exit the water
not have quite as dramatic an impact; however, they are prematurely as the elbow moves upward in synchronization
often associated with the most basic skills. For example, with upward torso rotation. Gaining maximum propulsion
the streamline position is the most basic in competitive requires moving the hand and torso differently—the hand
swimming, yet many top swimmers have not mastered a must push backward as the torso rotates upward.
perfect streamline. It is essential to master the streamline as
d
it is fundamental to decreasing resistance and establishing Position of least resistance Faster swimmers tend to have a significantly
an optimal base for generating propulsion. improved drag coefficient compared to slower swimmers, both for active drag during
swimming and for passive drag measured while gliding in the streamlined position.1
Since the drag coefficient is a measure of technique proficiency, this indicates—
When swimmers begin a pull to generate propulsion (in any of
unsurprisingly, perhaps—that faster swimmers have better technique, both in terms
the four competitive strokes), very often the arm is completely
of propulsion and streamlining.1 When gliding, many swimmers fail to streamline
straight. Because a straight arm has poor leverage (that is, a
effectively. Drawing an oval around the shoulders, as shown here, shows the smallest
low mechanical advantage), beginning the pull with a straight
cross-sectional area for a body that minimizes resistance or drag (B). When a
arm generates very little force. By flexing the elbow to begin
swimmer’s body parts extend outside the oval (A), they increase the cross-sectional
the pull, the swimmer immediately gains better leverage,
area the body presents in the direction of the gliding motion, and therefore increase
rapidly increasing propulsion, and could see a considerable passive drag. When swimming, as in breaststroke, it is more of a challenge to
time improvement. minimize the body’s cross-sectional area, and therefore drag. Note how the legs of the
model (D) are positioned closer to the oval when compared to a typical swimmer (C).
Minimizing drag
Gliding (passive drag)
A B
60 Technique

--- Page 62 Text ---
Drag factor
CH2_SP7_G3
CHC2H_2S_PS7P_7G_3G3
Elbow flexion
o
Squaring up The drag equation shows that the size of the resistive force
increases with the square of velocity (see page 43). So, if swimming velocity
doubles (×2), the resistance increases by a factor of four (×22)—for
example, in the graph (left), at a velocity of 1.0 m/s, the resistance is 40 N,
while at 2.0 m/s, the resistance increases to 160 N. This means that at faster
swimming speeds, small further increases in velocity cause large increases in
resistance. For example, at 1.0 m/s, an increase in velocity of 0.2 m/s
increases resistance by 20 N, while at 2.0 m/s, the same increase in velocity
of 0.2 m/s increases resistance by 40 N. Propulsion must also increase to
match and counter the resistance—because of the square relationship
between velocity and force, greater increases in propulsive force are needed
at higher speeds in order to achieve the same increments in velocity. For
o
instance, at 1.0 m/s, an increase of 20 N in propulsive force produces a Flex effect Optimizing technique is essential to maximize propulsive force. At the
0.2 m/s increase in velocity, while at 2.0 m/s, an increase of 40 N in start of the stroke, the swimmer should immediately flex the elbow, to gain better
propulsive force is needed to produce a 0.2 m/s improvement. leverage. A straight arm has a lower mechanical advantage, and cannot generate
the propulsion that is so important at the beginning of the pull.
Swimming (active drag)
61
)N(
ecrof
evitsiseR
200 2.5
160 2.0
120 1.5
80 1.0
40 0.5
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 0.0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Swimming velocity (m/s) Propulsive force (N)
Note: 1.0 m/s ≈ 1.09 yd/s
Flexed elbow for
Flex better leverage
Straight arm has
poor leverage
)s/m(
yticolev
gnimmiwS
C D

--- Page 63 Text ---
What hand pitch How should I
generates the angle my hand
most force? to swim faster?
Hand pitch is the angle formed between the palm of the d Making a pitch The angle of hand pitch
hand and the direction of the hand’s path through the water. is the angle between the palm of the hand and
Depending on the stroke and the point in the stroke cycle, a the direction of its path through the water. Drag
swimmer’s hand might be angled very differently. For example, force is generated in a direction opposite to the
hand path. Lift force is generated perpendicular
the palm may be facing directly backward or completely toward
to the path of the hand. The drag and lift
the side. Hand pitch also varies between swimmers.
vectors determine the size and direction
of the resultant force.
In freestyle and backstroke, most competitive swimmers
maintain their palm facing backward, relative to the body’s
direction of motion, through much of the underwater arm
motion. In butterfly, swimmers often angle their palms to the
sides of the pool at the beginning of the pull and then angle
their hands to face backward. In breaststroke, the palms
typically first angle toward the sides and then toward the
body midline.
Research has been conducted to determine how the hand Hand pitch
pitch affects propulsion. The flow of water around the hand
has been likened to the flow of air around the wing of a plane,
producing forces in a similar way. The hand motion produces
a force in a direction opposite to the hand path (drag) and a
force perpendicular to the hand path (lift). These component
vector forces combine to determine both the magnitude and
direction of a resultant force, which ultimately provides the
swimmer’s propulsion.
The wide variations between swimmers in hand pitch is Thumb
surprising given that hand pitch is one of the most researched
topics in swimming. In addition, there has been considerable Pinky finger Hand pitch
angle
consistency in the results among research groups carrying out
experiments in which the hand pitch angle was changed and Hand path angle
the resultant force was measured. Back in 1979, a study found
that a 70° hand pitch angle produced the greatest resultant Resultant force
force, and since then multiple further research projects have Drag
confirmed these findings, suggesting an optimum hand pitch Lift
in the range 70° to 75°.1 Hand path direction
62 Technique

--- Page 64 Text ---
a Pitch perfect This graph shows the
variation of force with the angle of hand pitch,
as observed in six studies.1–6 The solid circles
represent calculated force values from the
study data. The colored lines are the best-fit
trend lines to show the pattern more clearly.
The red box shows the range of greatest force
for all six studies. The overall results show
that a hand pitch of 70° to 75° generates
the greatest force.
d
Angling for success The inward sculling
motion in breaststroke is different from the
pull-and-push phases of butterfly, backstroke,
and freestyle. A hand pitch of 45° generates
maximum force on a sculling motion. Here, the
swimmer’s right hand is sliding sideways with
very little pitch and generating only about 20 N.
The left hand has a pitch of around 45° and is
generating about 40 N.
63
)%(
ecrof
dnah
tnatluser
evitaleR
Range of greatest force
for all six studies
Hand pitch angle (°)
Left hand
Right hand
20 (N)
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Force variation
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
Inward sculling motion
120
90
60
30
0
40 (N)
120
90
60
30
0

--- Page 65 Text ---
Which hand path Should my hands
generates the follow a curved or
most propulsion? a zigzag path?
The path of the hand in freestyle depends on whether it is adjusted to the swimmer’s frame of reference—the body.2
graphed with respect to the water or the body—because the As the swimmer moves forward during a stroke cycle, the hand
swimmer is moving forward relative to the water during the moves backward about twice as far with respect to the body
stroke cycle. The typical hand path that freestyle swimmers as with respect to the water. The optimal hand path angle when
display is curved and S-shaped. However, the optimal hand considering the path with respect to the body, therefore, is
path, giving the greatest propulsive force, is better described about one-half the optimal angle when considering the path
as a very gradual zigzag.1 with respect to the water—that is, 12.5°.
To achieve the optimal hand path first requires using the optimal An optimal hand path results from moving the hand at a
hand pitch—research shows that a hand pitch angle of 70° to gradual angle from in front of the shoulder to beneath the
75° produces the greatest resultant force (see pages 62–63). head, and then changing direction to angle the hand from
It has also been found that the resultant force generated by the under the head to beneath the thigh. If the hand enters in front
movement of the hand in the water is angled at 25° to the line of the shoulder, then a slight zigzag path can optimize force
of the hand path. So, to ensure that the resultant force acts in and make it possible for a swimmer’s hand to enter and exit
the forward horizontal direction of body motion, the swimmer the water in line with the side of the body, thereby minimizing
must angle the hand path at 25° to that forward direction (with twisting of the body.3
respect to the water)—that is, the hand must move from in front
of the shoulder toward the body midline. When the hand path
is angled in this way, the resulting hand pitch is approximately Optimal hand path
perpendicular to the horizontal direction of body motion—that
is, with the palm facing backward.
It is relatively straightforward for a swimmer to maintain the
palm facing backward throughout the underwater arm motion.
Achieving the optimal hand path of 25° is more challenging.
The optimal hand path with respect to the water must be 25°
Thumb
Pinky
a Top resultants As the arm passes under the shoulders, the hand path is finger
backward and angled so that the resultant force is completely propulsive, acting 70°–75°
Hand pitch
directly forward in the direction of motion. The drag force is directly opposite the
angle
direction of the hand path and the lift force is perpendicular (90°) to the drag force. 25°
The drag and lift vectors determine the magnitude and direction of the resultant Hand path
angle
force. Competitive swimmers generally have their palms facing backward during
most of the underwater arm motion, to maximize the resultant propulsive force in
the forward direction. Resultant force Drag Lift Hand path direction
64 Technique

--- Page 66 Text ---
d
Hand path relative to the water and the body Forging a path The typical hand path of the freestyle
swimmer in the left panel is in the shape of an “S.” The hand
moves slightly away from the body midline (second image), to
12.5° hand path angle,
the body midline (third image), and away from the body midline
with respect to the body
again (fourth image). The right panel illustrates the more
CH2_SP9_G4_LH_Bl_A
gradual changes in direction for an optimum hand path.
25° hand path angle, with CH2_SP9_G4_RH_Bl_1
respect to the water Hand path shape
CH2_SP9_G4_LH_Bl_B
da
Relative motion When
CH2_SP9_G4_RH_Bl_2
considering how the hand moves
relative to the water (A), the optimum
angle for its path in freestyle is 25°
to the midline of the body, but when
the frame of reference for the hand
CH2_SP9_G4_RH_Bl_3
movement is the body, the optimum
CH2_SP9_G4_LH_Bl_C
hand path angle is halved to just
12.5° (B). The water resists the
backward movement of the hand,
so the hand moves less with respect
to the water than the body. In the
bottom image the blue line shows the
CH2_SP9_G4_LH_Bl_D
hand path with respect to the water
and the red line shows the hand path A B CH2_SP9_G4_RH_Bl_4
with respect to the body. The hand
moves backward about twice as far
with respect to the body as it does
with respect to the water.
CH2_SP9_G3
Hand path with respect Hand path with respect
to the body to the water
65
The blue line shows the hand path with respect to the water
and the red line shows the hand path with respect to the body.
The hand moves backward about twice as far with respect to the body
as it does with respect to the water.

--- Page 67 Text ---
Why is shoulder What causes my
impingement the most shoulder pain?
common swimming injury?
Shoulder injuries are prevalent in competitive swimming, even of typical swimming arm motions that are particularly stressful
affecting swimmers younger than 10 years old. Most studies to the shoulder. Three examples of harmful technique in
over the past 40 years have found that at least one in three freestyle are entering the arm with a shallow angle, maintaining
swimmers, and in some cases two in three swimmers, suffered the arm parallel to the surface after completion of the arm
shoulder injuries. What’s more, the proportion of swimmers entry (as in “catch-up” stroke), and internal arm rotation during
with shoulder injuries is certainly not decreasing. the recovery. Unfortunately, many swimmers suffer from all
three stressful motions.
There are three primary risk factors for shoulder injury:
harmful technique, overuse, and muscular imbalances (see There is no avoiding shoulder stress in swimming. However,
also pages 156–157). Stretching and strengthening exercises there are technique adjustments to minimize both the severity
can correct muscular imbalances (see pages 114–115). and duration of shoulder stress and reduce the chance of
Moderation of training distance can mitigate overuse. However, injury. For example, a downward angle on the freestyle arm
swimmers must also carefully monitor their technique and entry positions the arm below the shoulder at the completion
make adjustments to minimize stress. of the entry, to minimize stress severity.1 Immediately
beginning the pull after completion of the arm entry minimizes
Elevating the arm overhead (as in all four competitive strokes) the duration of shoulder stress. Externally rotating the arm on
reduces the space between the bones of the upper arm and the freestyle recovery also minimizes stress. Protecting the
shoulder. As a result, the soft tissues between the bones—the shoulder from injury requires precise control of the arm
tendons and bursa—are compressed. There are a number throughout the entire stroke cycle.
a
Shoulder burden Shoulder injuries are extremely
prevalent in swimmers. Even the youngest competitive
swimmers are not immune to shoulder injury, as a
recent study on 370 injured swimmers showed. The
study found that for swimmers aged 11 to 18 shoulder
injuries were common, but at ages 19 and above
swimmers suffered shoulder injuries more than all
other injuries combined.2
66 Technique
seirujni
fo
rebmuN
Prevalence of shoulder injuries in swimmers
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
Shoulder 5
Other
0
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
Age

--- Page 68 Text ---
a
Feeling the squeeze When the arm is lifted
overhead, the subacromial space between the bones of
the shoulder and the upper arm becomes squeezed. If this
motion occurs repeatedly, as in competitive swimming,
over time the compression of the bursa and tendons
Subacromial space
between the bones causes inflammation and pain.
This is known as shoulder impingement.
Inflamed rotator
cuff tendon
Scapula
g
Shallow entry These images show a typical
arm entry (left arm) that stresses the shoulder.
Because the arm is in a weak and awkward
position (bottom image), only minimal hand
force is generated as pull begins (top image).3
g g
Stress trifecta This swimmer Playing catch-up “Catch-up stroke” is
exhibits three technique elements an ineffective arm coordination for freestyle
that stress the shoulders: neck that stresses the shoulder. The right arm in
flexion, shoulders submerged the left image (A) is maintained motionless
deeper than hands, and inward in front of the shoulder after completion
rotation of the arms. Each of of the arm entry while the opposite arm
these technique elements are continues to move to “catch up.”
independently stressful. The Maintaining the arm entry position
combination of factors produces increases the “time of exposure” to
maximum stress.4 shoulder stress. In addition, torso rotation
(B) further exacerbates shoulder stress.
67
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Shoulder impingement
Acromion Clavicle
Swollen bursa
Shallow angle arm entry
Humerus
Left hand
110
88
66
44
22
0
Time
Internal arm rotation Catch-up stroke
A B

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 1 ---
ACTOMION UldVICIE

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 2 ---
ACTOMION UldVICIE

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 3 ---
ration and pain.
ment.

subacromial space

Inflamed rotator
cuff tendon

gle arm entry

Scapula

Humerus

<@ Shallow entry These imaa

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 4 ---
a ae

€ images show a typical

stresses the shoulder.
eak and awkward
only minimal hand

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 6 ---
Scapula

These images show a typical

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 9 ---
a5 show a typical
; the shoulder.
id awkward

imal hand

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 10 ---
Scapula

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 11 ---
acromial space between tne bones of
ihe upper arm becomes squeezed. If this
eatedly, as in competitive swimming,
oression of the bursa and tendons

s causes inflammation and pain.
shoulder impingement.

Swollen bursa

Subacromial space

Inflamed rotator
cuff tendon

Shallow angle arm entry

Time

Humerus

<@ Shallow entry These ime
arm entry (left arm) that stress
Because the arm is in a weak
position (bottom image), only r
force is generated as pull begi

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 12 ---
eling the squeeze When the arm is lifted

2ad, the subacromial space between the bones of
oulder and the upper arm becomes squeezed. If this
7 occurs repeatedly, as in competitive swimming,
me the compression of the bursa and tendons

en the bones causes inflammation and pain.

> known as shoulder impingement.

Shallow angle arm entry

o
o
i

sft hand

Acromion

Swollen bursa

Subacromial space

Inflamed rotator
cuff tendon

Humerus

<@ Shallow entry These im
arm entry (left arm) that stres
Because the arm is in a weak
position (bottom image), only
force is generated as pull bec

Time

--- Page 69 Text ---
Swim training includes two major areas—skill learning (technique) and
conditioning. The training emphasis for younger swimmers is usually on
skill learning. Once swimmers become teenagers, the emphasis usually
switches to conditioning. This chapter includes information about how to
continue skill learning during the teenage years, as well as how to break
with conventional wisdom on conditioning. It covers a systematic approach
to skill learning, the importance of implementing deliberate practice
strategies, helpful and harmful drills, using hand paddles for technique
feedback, tips for starts and turns, the trade-off between technique
and conditioning, and practice time and distance requirements to
develop expertise. There are also sections on how the body adapts
to training, overtraining, hypoxic training, high-intensity training,
and ultra-short race-pace training.

--- Page 70 Text ---
c h a p t e r t h r e e
p o o l t r a i n i n g
Rod Havriluk

--- Page 71 Text ---
Is a systemic Will standardized
approach to skill coaching improve my
learning beneficial? technique more quickly?
Swimmers frequently receive different technique instruction A model for optimal technique is based on physics, supported
when changing teams, and sometimes when changing by applied research, and explained with specific cues. Because
coaches within the same team. Different instruction regimens all humans have technique limitations, a computer-simulated
are inevitable when coaches choose different top swimmers as biomechanical model is necessary to help explain aspects
their performance models, for there can be dramatic differences of performance. The coach training program should include
in their techniques. (Even casual observers question how such both this model of optimal technique and learning strategies.
varied techniques can all be optimal!) Yet the conventional Since the conventional practice that coaches are likely to
wisdom of the swimming culture is to model the technique of have experienced as swimmers is quite different from the
each successively faster swimmer, without any scientific standardized approach, and insufficient to master optimal
analysis or justification. technique, deliberate practice strategies must be incorporated
into training. These include swimmers undertaking a sufficient
A systematic approach to skill learning standardizes information number of repetitions, staying focused in the cognitive and
so that every swimmer on a team, or even within a national associative stages of skill learning and replicating superior
federation, receives the same instruction.1 There are three performance, while coaches must give clear instructions,
major requirements for implementing a systematic skill-learning immediate feedback and individualized supervision, and offer
system—an optimal model for technique, a coach training tasks of appropriate difficulty involving a variety of learning
program, and what is known as “deliberate practice” (DP). strategies. In addition, a regular skills competition is likely
Implementation of a system that includes these components to give swimmers the incentive to devote the necessary
not only standardizes learning so that swimmers receive attention to technique.
consistent information, but can also accelerate the learning
process, emphasize the technique elements that help avoid
On the kick upbeat, keep
injury, and enhance the coaching profession.
your feet submerged so only
your heels break the surface.
a
Training model Physics principles allow us to develop
a model swimming technique that minimizes resistance and
maximizes propulsion. Numerous studies on hand pitch, Area presenting
path, speed, and resulting force confirm the model. The resistance to movement
is minimized
graphic represents a computer-simulated biomechanical
model of one position in an optimal butterfly stroke. The
model minimizes the cross-sectional area of the body Bend elbows to 90°
that is perpendicular to the direction of movement, for optimum propulsion
which reduces resistance. It also indicates that a 90°
elbow angle provides the best leverage (mechanical
As you begin your pull,
advantage) for generating maximum propulsion.
bend your elbows so
your hands pass beneath
your shoulders
70 Pool Training

--- Page 72 Text ---
CH2 SP1 G3 01
Traditional and systematic training comparison
Traditional practice,
Traditiaognea 1l1, –a1g2e t o1 113-–1124
to 13-14 (two(t wyoe yaerasrs))
Deliberate practice,
Deliberate practice,
age 13
age 13 (one(o nwe eweeekk))
Traditional practice,
Traditional, age 13-14
age 13–14 to 15–16
to 15-16 (two years)
(two years)
Deliberate practice,
Deliberate practice,
age 17
age 17 (one month)
(one month)
-–00..44 –-00..22 00 00..22 00..44 00..66 00..88 11..00 11..22
Improvement in technique (effect size)
Improvement in technique (effect size) Freestyle Breaststroke Backstroke Butterfly
Freestyle Breaststroke
o
Systematic approach In contrast to the findings for traditional
Backstroke Butterfly
training, research shows that teenagers treated with a system of
instructional strategies improved significantly in a short time. In two other
separate studies, DP interventions significantly improved the technique
of younger and older teenagers.2,3 Improvement from short-term DP
treatments of one week or one month was comparable to that resulting
from much longer (two year) periods of traditional training. The DP
treatment included the range of DP components as listed in the box on
page 73. Swimmers were asked to continually focus on specific visual
and kinesthetic cues.
71

--- Page 73 Text ---
How does deliberate What skill-learning strategies
practice apply to should be included in my
swimming? training sessions?
The “deliberate practice” concept was developed in 1993 But a detailed understanding of how deliberate practice
by identifying the practice strategies used by top performers components apply to swim training can improve the use of
to acquire expertise.1 Some of the specific characteristics of these learning strategies. For example, deliberate practice
deliberate practice that rapidly help to improve swimming skills conducted in a small pool, rather than a busy training facility,
include those listed in the box on the opposite page. Traditional is perfect for adjusting the task difficulty to match the
swim training sessions generally include these strategies to swimmer’s ability level—the swimmer is limited to a small
some degree. However, for a swimmer to progress as much number of strokes, minimizing fatigue and increasing the
and as quickly as possible, all of these strategies must be opportunities for feedback. A mirror placed on the pool
continuously included in every session. bottom provides visual feedback even in solo practice.
Swim training for younger swimmers typically emphasizes
conditioning, with a reasonable level of technique instruction.
Comprehensive strategies
Many programs concentrate on training distance for teenagers
at the expense of continued work on technique. Research
shows, however, that both younger and older teens can
Classroom instruction
Pool instruction
benefit from even short-term instructional interventions that
Explain optimal technique
Review selected cues
include deliberate practice strategies.2,3 using a model
Practice with short, slow,
Identify critical motions
non-breathing swims
and positions
There are numerous reasons why swimmers do not practice Repeat drills that isolate
Specify technique elements
deliberately. With a typical emphasis on conditioning, swimmers with cues to see and feel technique elements
are often swimming fast, and with fatigue, during a considerable
portion of each training session. Speed and fatigue make it very
difficult for a swimmer to focus on specific technique elements
to make sure they are replicating superior performance. Even
when swimming at a relatively slow pace, swimmers are likely to
lose focus on technique (that is, not maintain attention in the
Classroom analysis Pool testing
cognitive and associative learning stages of Bloom’s taxonomy)
Reinforce positive Collect data on stroke rate,
and instead rely on “automatically” processing each stroke cycle
technique elements stroke length and swim velocity
(switching to the autonomous or psychomotor learning stage).
Identify limiting factors Capture video and force data
Make comparisons Process information for
There are also distractions that make it difficult for a swimmer with model immediate feedback
to practice deliberately. There are often five or more swimmers
in each lane so that it is a challenge to focus on technique while
avoiding other swimmers. Usually, there are also a number of o Variety of learning strategies Much of the time, instruction and testing
conditioning instructions that a swimmer must process, such are conducted at the pool (blue arrows). A more comprehensive treatment
as maintaining a certain pace, heart rate, or intensity level. includes classroom sessions for instruction and analysis (red arrows).4
72 Pool Training

--- Page 74 Text ---
CHC3H_S3P_2S_PG2_1G1
LinLei nwee wigehigtsh_tws_hwithe iltien elisn eosn o fanc feasc e.5sp .t5pt
CHC3H_S3P_2S_PG2_1G1
LinLei nwee wigehigtsh_tws_hwithe iltien elisn eosn o fanc feasc e.5sp .t5pt
CHC3H_S3P_2S_PG2_1G1
LinLei nwee wigehigtsh_tws_hwithe iltien elisn eosn o fanc feasc e.5sp .t5pt
CHC3_HS3P_2S_PG21_G1
LinLei nwee wigehitgsh_tws_hwiteh iltine elisn oens ofanc feasc .e5sp .t5pt
Characteristics of
deliberate practice
• clear instructions
• appropriate task difficulty
• a sufficient number of
repetitions
• solo practice with and
without a coach
• immediate feedback
• a variety of learning strategies
• maintaining focus in the
first two learning stages
(cognitive and associative)
• replicating superior
performance
a
Clear instructions Images of
a biomechanical model demonstrating
optimal technique help to make
instructions very clear. It is vital to
include visual and kinesthetic cues
with the model to specify body part
orientations and motions.
a
Short and sweet The bar
graph on pages 70–71 shows that
improvements in technique following
short-term deliberate practice
treatments are comparable to those
resulting from much longer periods
of traditional practice.2 The specific
example illustrated here supports
these findings—the force curves for
a 14-year-old male backstroker show
that after a one-week deliberate
practice treatment his peak hand
force doubled.3
73
)N(
ecrof
dnaH
Model technique
As you complete your arm entry, straighten your arms When not breathing, keep your head motionless with the water
in front of and below the shoulders. level at the top of the head.
As you begin your pull, bend your elbows so that your On the kick upbeat, keep your feet submerged so that only your heels
hands pass directly beneath your shoulders. break the surface.
When breathing, keep your chin under water. As you complete your push phase, touch the front of your
thighs with your thumbs.
As your arms recover, keep your thumbs just As your arms recover, keep your elbows higher than your hands.
above the water.
Hand force after deliberate practice
Left Hand Right Hand
145
116
87
58
29
0
Before deliberate practice After 1 week of deliberate practice

--- Page 75 Text ---
Will 10,000 hours Will hours of
of practice make a practice perfect
swimmer an expert? my technique?
Some sources consider that 10,000 hours of practice is a Swimmers generally benefit physiologically from their training
necessary minimum to develop expertise in any field.1 While hours and achieve considerable expertise in conditioning.
a landmark study on deliberate practice by Ericsson, Krampe, Research shows, however, that many practice hours are not
and Tesch-Römer2 is often cited, these researchers did not sufficient to produce technique mastery. The results of a recent
find that 10,000 hours was necessary, nor that 10,000 hours study3 showed that, during most of a typical training session,
would guarantee achieving an expert level of performance. swimmers focus on conditioning and not on technique—which
They did find that, in a number of fields, experts typically suggests a possible reason why technique expertise is not
accumulated at least 10,000 hours of practice. However, always achieved, despite long hours of practice.
depending on the activity, experts had practiced from 2000
hours (for memorizing strings of numbers) to 25,000 hours Swimmers have a variety of distractions that interfere with their
(for playing the piano in concert). focus during a training session, including watching the pace
clock, avoiding collisions with other swimmers, and monitoring
For many activities, the accumulated practice hours may have effort and pain levels. A normal team training environment is
more to do with the normal progression of training programs quite different from the “solo practice” found to be essential for
as opposed to a plan designed to develop expertise. Children deliberate practice.4 Because of the difficulty in focusing during
often become involved in an activity like swimming at a young a team session, swimmers desperately need solo practice in
age (8 years old or younger, for example). Practice sessions for order to perfect technique.
beginners are typically one hour, yielding two or three hundred
12,000
10,000
8000
a
Building up Based on a training progression by the
former CEO of Australian Swimming Dr Ralph Richards, 6000
swimmers accumulate almost 10,000 practice hours by
the time they are older teenagers.5 The LTAD (Long Term
4000
Athlete Development) model used in English swimming
(up to age 19) proposes similar accumulated practice
hours to the Richards model.6
2000
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
74 Pool Training
)sruoh(
ecitcarp
evitalumuC
hours of practice per year. Preteens often train about Training progression and long-term development
500 hours per year and teenagers as much as 1000
hours per year. Many swimmers practice 10,000
hours by the time they finish high school, but
they do not necessarily achieve an expert level
of performance.
Richards’ training progression5
LTAD model used by Amateur
Swimming Association (ASA) in England6
Swimmer age (years)

--- Page 76 Text ---
CH3 SP3 G2 Putting in hours
Line weights pt 25 white fig outlines
labels are 8pt Helv Neue (55 Roman)
Distance
runner
Orienteer
Cross country
skier
Rower
Cyclist
Swimmer
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Annual training hours
Male freestyle swimmers Female freestyle swimmers
dC
,tneiciffeoc
gard
evitcA
g
Putting in the hours This chart shows the representative
peak annual training (in hours) for champion athletes from different
sports. Ballistic and eccentric loading differences, demands on
technical entrainment, and non-specific training distance may
all contribute to the differences.7
d
Diminishing returns Research shows that teenagers do
not continue to improve their technique (as measured by the
drag coefficient, Cd, where a lower Cd indicates a more effective
technique), even with many more thousands of practice hours.
A cross-sectional analysis provides a view of the technique trend
for traditional training. The graph shows data on eight groups of
freestyle swimmers of different ages, demonstrating a dramatic
improvement in technique (drop in Cd) from the 9–10 age group
to the 11–12 age group.8 However, the improvement to the
13–14 age group is much more modest, and there is no further
improvement evident during the teenage years. These findings
are perhaps unsurprising considering the increase in training
distance and conditioning, and decrease in technique instruction,
typical in traditional training regimens for teenagers. This is
illustrated in the table, which compares the number of swimmers
focused on technique, as opposed to other factors, in each
phase of a training session.3
CH3_SP1 G2 01
Traditional training
Swim training focus
1.5 1.5
1.4 1.4 Phase of training session
Swimmer focus Warm-up Main sets Cool-down
1.3 1.3 Technique 5 0 1
1.2 1.2 Conditioning 3 10 2
Technique and
1.1 1.1 1 3 0
conditioning
1.0 1.0 Other 9 5 15
TOTAL 18 18 18
0.9 0.9
0.8 0.8
Male freestyle swimmers
0.7
0.7 9–10 11–12 13–14 15–16 17–18 Female freestyle swimmers
9 - 10 11 - 12 13 - 14 15 - 16 17 - 18
Age group
Age group
75
C
,tneiciffeoc
gard
evitcA
d
Annual training hours for champion athletes
Distance runner
Orienteer
Cross-country skier
Rower
Cyclist
Swimmer
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
Annual training hours

--- Page 77 Text ---
t c e j b o d e
C
p
_
u
2
o
G
g r
_
e
A
l d
3
d
P
a
S
p
_ 3
h
H
c a
C
e
e q u i p m e n t :
h a n d p a d d l e s
Paddles are the one essential piece of training
equipment. While often thought of as strength training
equipment, paddles are also extremely valuable for
improving technique. Paddles slow the hand speed
and make it easier for a swimmer to track the hand
path while it is within the field of view. When the
paddle moves out of the swimmer’s view, the size
and shape make the pitch of the paddle more obvious.
The enhanced feedback provides a swimmer with
precise information for improving technique.
However, improving technique is far more complicated than just
wearing a piece of plastic on your hands. There is no research
evidence that an improvement in technique can be achieved by
training with a specific paddle design. The paddle goes where o
Strength-training with paddles The graphs show hand force data for two
the hand takes it, not the other way around. Although there are
cycles on trials in which a swimmer wore concave-shaped (3D) paddles, flat paddles,
creative paddle designs that limit motion in non-productive
or no paddles at all. When using 3D paddles the swimmer is hitting peak force with
directions, only future study will determine their benefits.
the left hand at the end of the push phase. The peak force values were similar
for bare hands and flat paddles, but about 50% higher for the 3D shape paddles.
The strength-training benefits of paddles depend largely on The consistency was remarkable, as the values for the 3D shape were higher than
a swimmer’s awareness of hand speed. If a hand paddle the flat paddles for both the left and right hands for every subject.1 The results
increases the area of the swimmer’s propulsive surface, and suggest that the unique paddle design could lead to improved strength.
the swimmer moves the hand with the paddle at the same
speed as without the paddle, the swimmer will generate more
propulsion. However, because of the larger surface area, a
swimmer will naturally move the hand through the water more d Bright colors make it easier to see
slowly with the paddle than without at first. The strength-training the exact orientation (pitch) of the paddle.
benefit depends on the swimmer gradually increasing the hand
speed when wearing paddles.
Hand paddles are sometimes blamed for causing shoulder
problems. Generally, a swimmer’s technique is to blame and
not the paddle. Once a swimmer has a shoulder injury, wearing
paddles can aggravate it. However, because paddles provide
such exact feedback, they can also be the best way to modify
technique, reduce shoulder stress, and recover from an injury.
76 Pool Training
)N(
ecrof
dnah
kaeP
500
Left hand
Right hand
400
300
200
100
0
Hand only Flat paddle 3D paddle

--- Page 78 Text ---
CH3_SP3A_G2_A
CH3_SP3A_G2_F
CH3_SP3A_G2_D
CH3_SP3A_G2_J _1
CH3_SP3A_G2_H
CH3_SP3A_G2_E
CH3_SP3A_G2_K
2 _ L _ 2 G
1
_
_
A
L
3
_
P
2
S
G
_
_
3
A
H
3
C
P S _ 3 H C
CH3_SP3A_G2_B
grouped object
g a
Paddles to highlight technique A hand paddle is basically a
flat piece of plastic, with about twice the surface area of the swimmer’s
hand. A finger strap over the middle finger and, generally, a wrist strap
hold it in place. Paddles cannot prevent a swimmer from performing
ineffective technique elements, but they provide invaluable feedback to
the swimmer and coach, so that issues can be analyzed and addressed.
CH3_SP3A_G2_G_1
3D paddles are concave, giving
a
m
cu
o
p
v
p
e
e
s
d
t h
s
r
h C
o
a
u
H p
g
e3
h
_ a
t
S
h
s
e
Pt h3
w
e
A a
h
t _ e
a
G r
n
.
d
2 _G_2
Avoid gripping
the sides of the
paddle.
Place the fingers flat
on the paddle surface. d
Paddles without wrist straps
Paddles without wrist bands provide
feedback about the effectiveness of the
d exit phase—during butterfly or freestyle,
Some paddles are designed to help
if a swimmer has an effective hand
with specific technique elements, such
orientation (with the pinky finger pointing
as excessive lateral motion (above). The
upward), the paddle will stay on the hand
perpendicular blades on the underside of
(A), but if the swimmer has an ineffective
the paddle restrict sideways movement.
hand orientation as the hand exits the
CH3_SP3A_G2_J _2
water (with the back of the hand facing
upward), the paddle will typically
come off (B).
A
d This paddle is intended to give the
swimmer feedback about the classic
“dropped elbow,” by providing more Correct technique
resistance if the elbow moves backward
in the same horizontal plane as the hand.
B
Wrong technique
77

--- Page 79 Text ---
What is the optimal Is it necessary to
training distance? swim so many laps?
The swimming culture generally emphasizes quantity over There are physiological guidelines that can help a coach
quality when it comes to training distances. A recent study cited determine the most appropriate training distance. For example,
mega-yardage values in the 1970s, in excess of 100,000 yd the duration of the majority of individual events for many
(90 km) per week, with current distances ranging between swimmers is about 2 minutes or less. Since the majority of
60,000 and 95,000 yd (55–87 km).1 Former Olympic coach the energy contribution is anaerobic for events of relatively
Gregg Troy has a “rule of thumb” of 76,500 yd (70 km) per short duration, it makes sense to train the appropriate energy
week.2 The fact that many programs have been extremely system. The ability to endure a 10,000 yd (9 km) training
successful with considerable or even excessive training session has very little to do with swimming fast in most events.
distances has served to reinforce this trend.
In addition to the physiological basis of training, there are also
There are, however, vastly differing views on appropriate anatomical, biomechanical, and skill-learning issues to consider
training distance. For example, Dave Salo, another former in determining the most appropriate training distance.5
Olympic coach has “not focused on yardage in 30 years.”3 Development of an optimal training plan must address speed
In the early years of his career “everything was about yardage and conditioning issues, but also consider factors such as the
… building up to 9,000–10,000 yd (8–9 km) a workout,” but health, strength, and technique of the swimmer. There are
he found that “the kids were miserable, and I was miserable.” swimmers that excel by training great distances. This does not,
With a similar approach to training distance, Brent Rushall however, confirm that considerable training distance is optimal.
developed Ultra-Short Race-Pace Training (USRPT) to
emphasize competition speed and not total training distance.4
80
70
60
12-week training 50
15-week training
40
30
a
All in the plan Training plans typically increase distance over
several weeks or months and then decrease distance during the
20
taper phase before the most important competition of the season.
In the two plans shown here, there is considerable difference in
10
the peak weekly distances. Some training plans anticipate the
need for recovery weeks with a reduced training distance.
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Week
78 Pool Training
)mk(
ecnatsid
gniniart
ylkeeW
Training distance plans

--- Page 80 Text ---
Benefits of a reduced training distance6
• fewer stroke repetitions decrease the chance of shoulder injury
• less fatigue makes it easier to maintain focus on technique
d
Power surge The contributions of anaerobic and aerobic
• more time for coach–swimmer interaction
energy systems change depending on the duration of exercise.
Swimmers mostly race distances of 200 m or less, so the time they • more time for technique analysis
spend swimming is usually less than two minutes. Performance in
these events is more closely related to power (anaerobic energy) • more time for race-specific practice
than endurance (aerobic energy).
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
79
noitubirtnoc
ygrene
fo
tnecreP
Power and endurance
Anaerobic Aerobic
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Exercise duration (min)

--- Page 81 Text ---
Which skill-isolation Do some drills
drills are most do more harm
beneficial? than good?
While there are a number of drills that are extremely helpful For most skills used in the unilateral strokes (backstroke and
for improving technique, simply performing a drill does not freestyle), swimmers can progress much faster by focusing on
guarantee an improvement. Some drills are at best a waste of specific technique elements within a normal stroke cycle, rather
time, while some can be counterproductive or even harmful. In than using skill-isolation drills. For example, a swimmer can
evaluating a swim drill, it is most important to determine if the continually evaluate head position and arm orientation at critical
drill replicates effective technique. A productive drill isolates part checkpoints, using visual and kinesthetic cues.
of a stroke so that a swimmer can focus on specific technique
elements.1 Counterproductive drills distort the body from the Some swim drills are not necessarily harmful, but are not helpful
normal swimming position, reinforce ineffective positions or either. For example, the breaststroke “three-second glide” drill
movements, and can cause joint stress. (where a swimmer maintains the streamline glide position after
each stroke) presumes that a swimmer will focus on the
There are numerous popular drills for freestyle. Unfortunately, streamline for three seconds. In reality, it is much more likely that
many of these drills, such as “kicking on the side” and “one- a swimmer will simply rest for the three seconds. There are
arm freestyle” are counterproductive because they reinforce some drills for the bilateral strokes (breaststroke and butterfly)
an ineffective arm position and stress the shoulder. “Catch-up” that can be extremely beneficial. Helpful breaststroke and
drill (see pages 52–53) is also detrimental, as it has similar butterfly drills isolate either the arms or the legs while
negative effects. What’s more, extensive research has shown maintaining bilateral symmetry—a swimmer can better focus on
that fast swimmers (or swimmers trying to go fast) do not use arm technique elements when there is no head, body, or leg
“catch-up” arm coordination, so practicing “catch-up” is motion. Breaststroke and butterfly drills are also useful in
counterproductive from a skill-learning perspective.2 minimizing vertical head and body motion when breathing.
Butterfly drill 1 2 3
Front view
Side view
Breaststroke drill 1 2 3
Front view
Top view
80 Pool Training

--- Page 82 Text ---
Visual and kinesthetic clues
Kinesthetic Kinesthetic
Freestyle Breaststroke
Visual
Visual
Visual
Kinesthetic
Butterfly Backstroke
Kinesthetic
Visual
o
See how it feels Most freestyle and backstroke passes the shoulders and the hand passes beneath the
drills distort the body position. To improve techniques in head in freestyle (top left)—to assess and modify arm
these strokes, it is much more expedient to focus on technique during the rest of the cycle, the swimmer
specific visual and kinesthetic cues—specific body part relies on kinesthetic cues. In backstroke, the swimmer
orientations that a swimmer can see or feel during the can see the arm above the surface in line with the side
stroke. Although a swimmer has a very limited range of the body, and feel a 90° bend at the elbow in the
d
Drilling down Some drills for the bilateral
of the stroke cycle within the field of view in all four lower arm (bottom right). In all four strokes, kinesthesia
strokes can be extremely effective. In these
strokes, it is possible to see the elbow bend as the arm provides most feedback on technique.
breaststroke and butterfly arm drills, the head,
body, and legs are motionless, which makes it
easier to control and focus upon the arm motion.
Effective butterfly and breaststroke drills
4 5 6
4 5 6
81

--- Page 83 Text ---
u l t r a - s h o r t r a c e - p a c e
SCIENCE
IN ACTION
t r a i n i n g ( U S R P T )
Traditional swim training emphasizes conditioning with total training
distance as the most important factor. More recently, some coaches
have placed a greater emphasis on quality instead of quantity. Ultra-
short race-pace training (USRPT) is one method that emphasizes quality
and has promoted the shift in training emphasis.1 The success of one
swimmer in particular, Michael Andrew, has encouraged more coaches
to try USRPT or at least downplay the quantity of training distance in
favor of a greater emphasis on quality.
USRPT was introduced by Dr Brent Rushall in 2011. His training method is
fundamentally different to other types of “quality” training in that a quality effort on
each swim is not just specified (as a pace for a given race), but required. In a typical
traditional training set, swimmers are given parameters according to the acronym
DIRT—distance, interval, repetitions, and time. For example, a set might be 20
repetitions of a distance of 50 m on an interval of 50 s, holding a time of 30 s for
each swim. (The interval includes both the swim time and rest time.) If a swimmer
does not swim the specified distance in the specified time, he or she has less rest
before pushing off for the next repetition, but will often receive encouragement from
the coach, and can usually continue to produce a substandard level of quality with
no modification of the training set (DIRT) parameters.
USRPT is different. If a swimmer is unable to swim a repetition at the required level
of quality (as indicated by performance time), he or she rests during the next
repetition (in this example, for 50 s). The rest will usually make it possible for the
swimmer to recover enough to achieve the required performance time on the next
repetition. If the swimmer achieves the required performance time, he or she can
a
Quality focus Michael Andrew in the
continue with the set. If the swimmer fails to achieve the required performance
men’s 100 m butterfly during the Arena Pro
time on two successive attempts, he or she must terminate the set. The USRPT
Swim Series at Austin, Texas on January 15,
guidelines, therefore, assure that swimmers will benefit from substantial practice
2016. Andrew credits his phenomenal
using race-specific velocity and technique.
swimming success largely to USRPT.
Instead of swimming around 12,000 yd
(11,000 m) in traditional training each day,
much of which could be called “junk
yardage,” Andrew swims just 2500–
3000 yd (2285–2740 m) daily, focusing
on race pace and perfecting technique.
82 Pool Training

--- Page 85 Text ---
What is the physiological How does my body
adaptation process? adapt to training?
A basic objective in training is to elicit a response that improves Neural adaptations involve more motor units (muscle fibers
performance. To accomplish that goal, swim programs and the nerve cells that serve them) being recruited, or
generally have an increase in workload in the beginning of the activated, at once.
season, a hard-training phase in the middle, and a decrease
in the workload at the end (that is, a taper). The increase in Put simply, if the training stress is not sufficient to overload the
workload is usually controlled by varying the training distance body, then there will be no physiological adaptation—that is,
and intensity. At the end of the season, there is the expectation the body will not change. If a training stress is too great to be
of a performance improvement due to the taper (see also tolerated, then the body will be injured, or over-training will
pages 90–91). occur.3 Swimmer performance must be carefully monitored
during each training session so that adjustments can be made
Generally, the emphasis at the beginning of a swim season is as necessary. A coach will often use a standard training set—
on aerobic conditioning. The physiological responses include for example, a set of 100 yd or 100 m freestyle swims on a
increases in heart, lung, and blood volume. Because the heart given interval—to monitor swimmer adaptation.
is larger, it can pump more blood with each beat—that is, the
stroke volume increases. This of course means that, at a given
heart rate, the volume of blood pumped per minute—the
cardiac output—also increases. (And at a given cardiac output,
the heart rate will be lower.) The increase in lung volume allows
oxygen to enter the blood and reach the muscles at a higher
rate. The increase in blood volume raises arterial blood
pressure. The net result is an improved capacity for work.
Strength training (whether performed on land or in the water)
is a vital component of swim training and is somewhat in
conflict with endurance training (see also pages 74–75).
The most obvious difference is the number of repetitions
performed to optimize each regimen. The endurance emphasis
in swimming typically involves tens of thousands of stroke
repetitions. Strength training typically involves sets of only
ten repetitions of an exercise. Fortunately, research shows
that the benefits of endurance training are not compromised,
and can be enhanced, by concurrent strength training.1 The
effect of strength training is to produce muscle hypertrophy
(bigger muscles) that can generate more force. While the
cross-sectional area of the muscle is the best indicator of
muscular strength, the neural component is also important.2
84 Pool Training
level
ssentiF
Stimulus training
Stimulus—training session Stimulus 2 Stimulus 3
Super-compensatory
adaptation
—fitness gain
Fatigue Compensation
(recovery)
Recovery time between
training sessions

--- Page 86 Text ---
CH3_SP6_G2
1
Neuromuscular
2
adaptations
Respiratory
Muscle hypertrophy (growth)
adaptations
Increased simultaneous
Better oxygen uptake in lungs
recruitment of motor units
Improved blood flow
More fatigue-resistant
through lungs
slow-twitch muscle fibers
Reduced submaximal
respiratory rate
3
Cardiovascular
a
Making changes The body adapts in response to the frequency, adaptations
intensity, duration, and specificity of training. However, a law of Increased cardiac muscle mass and
diminishing returns comes into play, because as training progresses, chamber volume, causing increased
stroke volume and cardiac output
incremental gains become smaller, so the level of overload must be
Increased blood volume, red blood cell
constantly increased to continue to achieve benefits. The graph shows
density and hemoglobin concentration
how neural and muscular adaptation improve with repeated training
Faster diffusion of oxygen and
over time, and then plateau. Muscular adaptation includes the growth in fuel into muscles
cross-section of muscles, while neural adaptation involves improvements
in the number of motor units (muscle fibers) that can be stimulated at
once. The summed effects of improvement in both the nervous and
muscular systems contribute to a swimmer’s increase in strength.4
Stimulus 4 Stimulus 5
g
Cumulative gains The training adaptation cycle includes
a training stimulus (overload), fatigue, and recovery, during
which stressed tissue heals and muscle tissue grows, and
Time super-compensatory adaptation, resulting in increased fitness
and performance relative to the initial baseline level. Repeated
training sessions with appropriately increasing workloads
produce cumulative effects over time. Optimum workouts
provide a maximum training effect—if the workouts are too
easy, the swimmer will not build the optimum fitness gains,
while if they are too hard, recovery may not occur before the
next session, and the swimmer’s fitness will decline over time.
The recovery interval between training stimuli is also
important—if the swimmer trains again too soon, muscle
tissues will not be adequately recovered, but if the new stimulus
Optimal
is left too late, fitness levels will return toward baseline and the
Inadequate stimulus
gains of adaptation will be lost.
Insufficient recovery time
or stimulus too great
ssergorP
Physical adaptations
1
2
3
4
Time
Strength
Neural adaption
Muscle growth
4
Muscular
adaptations
More blood capillaries in muscles
Increase in size and number of
mitochondria—the “energy factories”
in cells
Increased myoglobin concentrations,
which aids oxygen delivery to
muscle fibers
Increasing fitness and performance
85

--- Page 87 Text ---
How do swimmers respond Should I always
to extreme overload? train hard?
It is a real challenge for a coach to design a training program enhanced performance (see pages 84–85). When the overload
that provides the appropriate overload. Even the most is excessive, however, swimmers may react in very different
conventional training plan can have a variety of outcomes ways. In some cases, swimmers may consider even extreme
depending on the training load, swimmer effort, and many other soreness as part of the adaptation process and continue
factors. For this reason, it is essential to periodically monitor training, which could result in a cumulative drop in fitness if
swimmer response to training load to avoid overtraining, as the further training occurs before the swimmer has recovered
consequences of this can include a drop in performance, injury, properly. In other cases, muscular fatigue may self-limit
or even illness. Unfortunately, overtraining is common in continued training and cause a swimmer to swim slower.4
swimming. In one study of competitive swimmers, 50% were
classified in maladaptive (overtrained) categories.1 In another Tracking data about how swimmers respond to training is
study, almost one-half were overtrained.2 Data from 30 studies essential so that adjustments can be made to ensure an
show that over 50% of swimmers suffer from shoulder injury, optimal result. An adjustment in training load may be the most
where excessive training distance is a primary risk factor. obvious response, but rest, nutrition, and hydration are other
important factors to consider. Attaining an adequate amount
Preventing overtraining requires tracking specific variables. of rest is difficult for a competitive swimmer who has two
A wide range of physiological, psychological, medical, and training sessions on most days. Swimmers often train for
performance tests have been used, because a single factor two hours without any substantial nourishment, where
is insufficient to reliably quantify likelihood of overtraining.3 some replenishment is usually required after one hour. While
Coaches strive to overload their swimmers so that, after a “train hard” is a common and necessary mantra in sports,
recovery period, “super-compensatory adaptation” produces it is also essential to carefully monitor the athlete’s response.
Burnout zone
g
Avoiding burnout Training causes fatigue, inevitably, but programs must be
engineered, based on response data from swimmers, to ensure that recovery and
super-compensatory adaptation can occur. There is a danger of overtraining and
failing adaptation, if a swimmer trains “too hard” without sufficient recovery. Here,
Swimmer A trained “moderately hard,” recovered from fatigue, and had a successful
adaptation. Swimmer B trained hard enough to be close to failing adaptation, but was
able to recover with a reduced workload, and achieved extreme adaptation. Swimmer
C worked so hard that he went into the failing adaptation zone and even with rest and
A
reduced work was not able to return to the normal adaptation zone.5
B
Extreme adaptation zone
Super-compensatory adaptation zone
C
Fatigue zone
Time during daily training regime
Failing adaptation zone (maladaptive)
86 Pool Training

--- Page 88 Text ---
o
Pushing too hard Nine national-caliber swimmers from a team known for training with a
substantial workload participated in a study2 and were tested seven times over an eight-month season.
In preparation for the major competition at the end of the season, coaches taper swimmers—gradually
reducing their workload so the swimmers can rest and recover. The muscles hypertrophy and are then
capable of generating more force. The average hand force over a 10 m swim at maximum swimming
velocity was calculated for each trial. The graph shows that each swimmer had a depressed hand force
value in the middle of the season as compared to the baseline at the beginning of the season. Each
swimmer’s force value was elevated at the end of the season as compared to the middle of the season.
However, only five of the nine swimmers (55%) had a higher force value at the end of the season as
compared to the baseline. The swimmers whose force values were depressed by about 10% during the
heavy workload were able to recover and generate more force after the taper than at the beginning of
the season. The swimmers whose force values were depressed by about 20% were not able to recover
after the taper. The results suggest that a workload that is too severe (because of training distance or
intensity, or both) may not allow swimmers to recover enough to improve performance.
87
)%(
ecrof
egareva
ni
noitairaV
Workload studies
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
Early (baseline) Middle (heavy workload) Late (taper)
Seasonal testing date
Female swimmers with lower force value
Male swimmers with lower force value
Female swimmers with higher force value
Male swimmers with higher force value
NEED TO KNOW
Tapers at the end of a season can vary
from less than one week to more than three
weeks, primarily depending on workload,
event, and individual differences.

--- Page 89 Text ---
What is Should I vary my
high-intensity effort level and
training? training distance?
Since the late 1960s, there has been an emphasis on training distance or frequency, was correlated with improvement
distance in swimming. “This ‘aerobic-base’ concept has for a group of elite swimmers.4 The findings of a fourth
flourished in all endurance sports and in reality is still the study suggested that swim programs should alter their
dominant swimming coaching philosophy applied in most parts approach to emphasize increased intensity quality, over
of the world.”1 However, while the trend for many programs low-intensity quantity.5
is still to have swimmers train substantial distances, some
coaches have found success with less distance and more The effect of a HIT program on technique is important to
intensity using high-intensity training (HIT). Ultra-short race- consider. If a swimmer is mostly training at fast speeds, he
pace training (USRPT) is an example of a HIT program (see or she may not be able to control specific technique elements.
pages 82–83). Even though swimmers are using training A swimmer must swim many thousands of strokes at a slow
distances that are only 50% of traditional programs, such stroke rate to effectively monitor and control technique. After
programs are still considered “very hard.”1 mastering a technique element, a swimmer must gradually
increase stroke rate to racing speed over many more
Much research supports the effectiveness of HIT. For example, thousands of strokes. The strategies necessary to improve
a study that applied a high-velocity training regimen to a group technique require caution in the amount of HIT in each training
of university swimmers over four years found a 10% and 8% session. A recent review summarized that “the current
performance improvement in the 100 and 200 yd (≈ 100 and evidence on the effects of HIT on performance is promising;
200 m) freestyle, compared to a 1–3% range of improvement however, it is difficult to draw accurate conclusions until further
reported for more traditional programs emphasizing training research has been conducted.”6
distance.2 Another study showed that high-intensity
flume training significantly improved swimming
Test—time Test—time
performance in a pool over 100 and 400 m.3
before HIT after HIT
2175
A third study found that intensity, but not training
2150
2125
2100
2075
2050
2025
–4 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Time (weeks)
2.5 weeks break Pre-conditioning HIT
88 Pool Training
)s(
emit
m
0002
naeM

--- Page 90 Text ---
a
No loss In one study, masters swimmers underwent
a six-week period of conventional high-volume, low-intensity
training, and then a similar period of high-intensity, low-volume
training.7 After the high-volume treatment, there was significant
increase in maximum oxygen uptake, and significant improvements
in 400 and 2000 m performance. After the subsequent high-
intensity treatment, there was a significant improvement in 100 m
performance without a loss of the other improvements.
d
Taking the HIT The graphic shows an experiment where two
groups of swimmers underwent both high-intensity (HIT) and
high-volume (HVT) treatments.8 One group underwent HIT first, then
HVT after the break. At the same time, the other group started with
HVT, then swapped to HIT. The training distance for HVT was double
the distance for HIT. The tests before and after each five-week
treatment involved several metrics, including each swimmer’s time
over 2000 m. When the results for both groups were pooled,
a significant improvement in the average (mean) 2000 m time
was found after the HIT treatment. There was a much smaller
improvement from the HVT treatment, which was not statistically
significant. This study is important for two reasons—first, it shows
that swimmers can train for less time and achieve as good or even
better results, and second, it shows an experimental design where
all participants are subjected to both treatments.
89
)%(
tnemevorpmi
egatnecreP
Improvements for long and short distance
Post HVT treatment Post HIT treatment
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
VO2 2000 m 400 m 100 m
max performance performance performance
HIT versus HVT training
Test—time Test—time
before HVT after HVT
2175
2150
2125
2100
2075
2050
2025
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
Time (weeks)
6 weeks break Re-conditioning HVT

--- Page 91 Text ---
What is the trade-off How do you plan
between conditioning and training for a
technique in a season plan? whole season?
The typical question asked about any training session is “how Even when conscientiously trying to maintain effective
far did you swim?” Rarely is a question posed about how far technique, conditioning demands of speed and effort make
you swam at race pace for a given event, or how far you swam it difficult for swimmers to stay focused.
focused on specific technique elements.
Coaches can use deliberate practice strategies to increase the
A season plan is usually based around the season-ending meet distance over which swimmers maintain effective technique (see
(for example, a championship event), but may also take into pages 72–73), if they are willing to stop swimmers if they do not
account interim competitions. For older, more competitive maintain control of specific technique elements.1 Coaches can
swimmers, there may be little alteration in the plan for any track the distance for which a swimmer maintains effective
interim competitions, while for younger, less competitive technique (deliberate practice distance or DPD) compared to
swimmers, there may be an adjustment for every interim meet. total training distance (TTD). The trade-off between DPD and
Some top competitors develop a four-year plan focused on TTD requires coaches to consider whether it is better to practice
Olympiads, as opposed to a single season or year plan. It is a longer distance with a less effective technique or a shorter
common to plan for both a longer time frame (a macro-cycle) distance with a more effective technique.
and interim shorter time frames (micro-cycles). Within each
cycle, a coach also plans how to vary different training activities,
such as technique and conditioning. The overarching concept
1.40 210
determining a season plan is how the workload—the training
distance and intensity combined—is varied week by week,
according to the competition schedule, to optimize performance. 200
1.36
Having set the plan at the start of the season, each day a coach
190
is then faced with decisions about what activities best fit the
plan. Each training session presents issues such as swimmer 1.32
tardiness, absence, illness, injury, soreness, fatigue, lack of
motivation, or conflicts with other activities, which may make it
necessary to deviate from the original plan. When this happens, 1.28
the pressure of the competition schedule and a typical emphasis 170
on conditioning often mean that work on technique is sacrificed.
1.24
160
a
Balancing act This chart shows the change in stroke length for a group of
swimmers over a set of eight 100 m freestyle swims.2 The swimmers maintained a
very similar swim time for each repetition. However, by the last two swims, their stroke 1.20 150
1 2 3 5 6 7 8
length had dropped so much that they were averaging two extra strokes per 25 m.
Based on these results, it might make more sense in future for the swimmers to swim
only 6 × 100 m, so that they can maintain their stroke count (that is, their technique).
90 Pool Training
)ekorts/m(
htgnel
ekortS
Number of 100-m freestyle swims
Stroke length Heart rate
)etunim
rep
staeb(
etar
traeH
Evaluating data
180
4

--- Page 92 Text ---
Month
Short-course season (25 m laps) Jan
Long-course season (50 m laps)
Transition phase (competition) Feb
Mar
a
Plan for success Weekly training distance often Apr
varies considerably from week to week as swimmers
taper to prepare for major competitions. During taper,
May
training distance is often reduced to about one-third
of peak distance. This chart, designed for masters
Jun
swimmers (19 years and older training with a less
formal group), shows a one-year plan involving three
Jul
major championships in May, August, and December.
d Aug
Going the distance A season plan usually
includes a breakdown of the emphasis on activities
and energy systems, but the training distance is Sep
generally the most prominent value. This is an
example of a plan for elite swimmers. Depending
on many training factors, it may be appropriate to
use periodization, where a season plan is divided
into smaller cycles.
0 6 12 24
Weekly training distance (km)
Month Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
Week 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516171819202122232425262728293031323334353637383940414243444546474849505152 1
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
91
)mk(
ecnatsid
gniniart
ylkeeW
teem
lauD
lanoitativnI xirP
dnarG
slanoitaN teem
lauD
xirP
dnarG
xirP
dnarG
xirP
dnarG
xirP
dnarG
slanoitaN
Endurance
steeM
Varying training distance
Oct
Nov
Dec
18
Season plan for elite swimmers
Taper Prep Endurance Specific endurance Anaerobic Mixed Taper Transition Prep

--- Page 93 Text ---
What is hypoxic How should I control
training? my breathing?
Hypoxic training involves depriving swimmers of an adequate on a stroke or during the turning motion at the wall. In each
oxygen supply with the intent of improving physiology and of these cases, the breath control is related to technique and
performance. There are a number of ways that coaches reduce performance, as opposed to a physiological training effect.
swimmers’ oxygen supply—altitude training, using a hyperbaric During a non-breathing stroke cycle, there is no need for the
chamber, underwater swimming, and swimming at the surface swimmer’s head to move. If the head is static with respect to
with a controlled breathing frequency, the last of which is the the body, a swimmer can be more certain of how other body
most common method. Breathing frequency is controlled parts are being controlled, for better focus on technique. In
during training swims in two ways—either by setting the addition, less head motion is likely to result in less distortion
number of stroke cycles between breaths, or by setting the of the body, and therefore less resistance. Another benefit of
number of breaths per length of the pool. less body distortion is that the body is in a more stable position
to generate propulsion.
Altitude training is generally possible for only a small
percentage of competitive swimmers. Although the scientific
evidence in support of altitude training is scarce, and its NEED TO KNOW
benefits are controversial,1 a recent study found that a four-
Some key terms:
week treatment of altitude training did indeed produce a
Hypoxic—Deprived of adequate oxygen supply
performance improvement in elite swimmers after a recovery
period at sea level.2 Hyperventilation—Rapid and deep breathing
Hypoventilation—Inadequate ventilation
Regardless of whether hypoxia and controlling breathing Hypercapnia—Elevated level of carbon dioxide in the blood
frequency have physiological advantages for swimming, there
Apnea—Temporary cessation of breathing
are definitely technique advantages, and swimmers often
Blackout—Loss of consciousness
control their breathing pattern for a performance benefit when CH3_SP10_G3
racing. For example, swimmers often take a breath on every
second stroke in butterfly, or on every third stroke in freestyle.
In breaststroke, some swimmers occasionally do not breathe Butterfly breathing
Non-breathing position
WARNING
Holding your breath can be extremely dangerous, possibly resulting in
blackout and death. It is recommended that swimmers breathe when
necessary and only practice breath-holding activities under the close
supervision of a swimming professional. During a non-breathing cycle in butterfly, the body
maintains a level position, minimizing resistance.
92 Pool Training

--- Page 94 Text ---
CH3_SP10_G2_A
Freestyle breathing
a Breathe easy When swimming Non-breathing position
freestyle with an optimal non-breathing
head position, the water level is at the
hairline. The swimmer can then breathe
with minimal head rotation. Note that,
during the breath, only one goggle is Head is still and looking down toward the pool
floor.
above the bow wave and that only part
of the mouth is visible.
CH3_SP10_G2_B Blow out
Effective breathing position
d
Butterfly breath It is difficult to
breathe less frequently than on every Swimmer is rotating her head to breathe through her mouth. Just one
goggle is above the bow wave and only part of the mouth is visible.
stroke when swimming butterfly.
CH3_SP10_G2_C
However, breathing less often (for
o
example, every two or three strokes) can Blow out Competitive swimmers
help a swimmer maintain a fairly level typically exhale continuously when
body position on the non-breathing stroke Ineffective breathing position the face is submerged. This prevents
cycles, and reduce resistance. On a water from going up the nose and also
breathing stroke cycle, some swimmers prepares the swimmer to inhale when
appear to be desperate for air, and lift the mouth is next above the surface.
their head far above the surface to make A swimmer will exhale forcefully
sure they get a sufficient breath. (through the nose and mouth) just
Unfortunately, this position severely before positioning the head to inhale,
Head over-rotated
distorts the body position and causes if necessary, in order to maximize
excess resistaCnceH. 3_SP10_G3 the inhalation.
Effective breathing position Ineffective breathing position
Neutral head position not too far above surface. If the head is raised too far above the surface on the
breathing cycle, the body position is badly distorted,
causing unwanted resistance.
93

--- Page 95 Text ---
What proportion of training How important are
should be focused on my starts, turns,
starts, turns, and finishes? and finishes?
When the subject of starts, turns, and finishes comes up, it’s kick very fast. Mastering this skill can take years—swimmers
often in reference to gaining a fraction of a second advantage, must practice consistency by counting underwater dolphin
or losing a race to a competitor who touched the wall a split kicks on each start and turn. Training sessions should also
second sooner. Swimmers do get “touched out” in this include repetitions of both the start and turn underwater
way, but generally it is swimming speed that determines the motions that are timed and evaluated by a coach. The
outcome of a race. However, the combination of the start, evaluation can determine if increasing the number of kicks
the turns, and the finish can easily add up to a full second is appropriate.
or more of benefit or deficit.
Another factor to consider is the impact of starts and turns on
It’s important to realize that starts and turns are very different different events (that is, sprints and distance events) and in
activities to swimming itself. The push-off from the wall or different pools (long course and short course). For example,
starting block is similar to a jumping motion, a land-based the start and the turn push-off can total as much as 30 m,
activity that most humans perform many times. Training for which is about 60% of a 50 m sprint race. Many swimmers
starts and turns should not just include repetitions of starts and can swim faster than they can kick underwater so realistically,
turns, but also land and water exercises designed to target the the percentage will be smaller (more like 35%). However, this
jumping motion. While the push-off motion is similar to jumping, is a still a substantial proportion of a sprint event and gives an
the movements before and after the jump are unique in both indication of the proportion of training that might be allocated
starting and turning. Finishes are a swimming activity, but also to these activities.
require specific planning skills to get to the wall without a
d
Start strong, finish strong It requires a substantial number of practice
decrease in speed and without taking an unnecessary stroke.
repetitions to achieve a backstroke start entry that minimizes resistance (A).
Unfortunately, backstroke starts are probably the least-practiced start, turn, or
The underwater phase of a start or a turn is of particular
finish skill. Swimmers also need to practice the backstroke finish so they don’t
importance. CompeCtitiHon3 r_uSlePs 1al1lo_wG s1w_imAmers to remain lose time gliding into the wall (B). This activity is difficult to practice in many
submerged to the 15 m mark. Some swimmers take full team training sessions when teammates may be standing in front of the wall,
advantage of this rule and benefit because they can dolphin awaiting their turn to swim.
Backstroke start and finish CH3_SP11_G1_B
A B
94 Pool Training

--- Page 96 Text ---
CH3_SP11_G2_BandC
CH3_SP11_G2_A
Optimum start g
Start of least resistance
Swimming starts require practice to
master a level take-off from the starting
blocks to maximize distance, with an
entry through a small “hole” to
minimize resistance.
CH3_SP11_G5
d a
Taking turns During training and warm-ups,
circle swimming is standard practice for competitive
swim teams to maximize pool use. Circle swimming
Turning practice
involves three or more swimmers in each lane,
swimming from end to end in a circular pattern.
Rotating the body at the wall
However, sloppy turn habits often develop when
does not provide the optimum
swimmers have to be more concerned with avoiding
position to push off.
collisions than with honing their skills. Swimmers often
rotate their bodies at the wall so they can better view
CH3_SP11_G3
oncoming traffic (A). When swimmers have the luxury of
their own lane, they can work to perfect their alignment A
(B). Swimmers need to practice the same push-off in
training sessions that they use in competition. The angle
of the push-off and the number of kicks underwater
are key factors to track during training. Coaches can
observe the distance from the wall at which a swimmer
surfaces as well as the swimming speed.
With her back facing the pool floor and
her feet aligned vertically, the swimmer
can achieve the strongest push-off at the
turn and stay beneath the turbulence.
B
95

--- Page 97 Text ---
The first rule of dryland training is simple: do no harm. Always remember
that dryland training is supplementary to our work in the pool. No matter
what dryland training approach is employed, it is there to support
swimming. For a swimming culture that has long followed a “more is better”
approach in dryland training, the concept of restraint can be unsettling,
yet essential. Safety and performance are not in opposition but rather
complement each other. Another critical piece for any dryland program is
to recognize that more “conditioning” is not needed for swimmers. When
we say “conditioning,” we are referring to high intensity workouts that
elevate the heart rate for extended durations. Better to keep the repetitions
low and the recovery periods long to avoid overloading swimmers on top of
their ample conditioning work in the pool. Many tools will work, but the
points covered in this chapter should guide any dryland program.

--- Page 98 Text ---
c h a p t e r f o u r
d r y l a n d t r a i n i n g
Allan Phillips

--- OCR from Page 98 Image 1 ---
weer FJ Tee Fe eS ee

Allan Phillips

--- Page 99 Text ---
Does dryland strength Will training on
training directly improve land help me to
performance in the water? swim faster?
Strength training for swimmers is one of the broadest and General guidelines for improving endurance performance
most contentious issues in the sport. Not only is the question propose 5–8 reps per set of at least two exercises, for 3–5 sets
of its effectiveness widely unsettled, swimmers are hardly a per workout, 2–4 times per week over a 6–16 week program.
homogenous group—age, distance, event, injury, technique, It’s suggested that this type of training boosts performance by
length of training program and experience are among the many improving neuromuscular activation and musculotendinous
variables that can significantly impact outcomes of any training stiffness.2 Excess stiffness is not always beneficial for
intervention. For example, the strength training goals, and swimmers but can be in certain instances.
expected adaptations, will be different for a distance swimmer
compared to a sprinter. The results seem positive for low-repetition, high-intensity
lifting. There is also evidence to suggest that the converse—
Swimmers have concerns about negative effects from strength high-repetition, low-intensity training—may not be beneficial,
training such as fatigue, excess bulk, and loss of aerobic despite its popularity in swimming culture. A training
performance—many worry that strength training may damage intervention using three exercises of 8–12 reps found no
the vital oxygen delivery network to muscles and organs significant improvements in 50 yd and 400 yd (46 m and
provided by capillary development. Of these concerns, fatigue 366 m) swimming performance,3 while swimmers who
appears to be the most valid, as overtraining is certainly included 6 sets of 50 s work/10 s rest on the ergometer in
possible if swimmers’ workloads are not properly managed. But their regular circuit training performed no better than swimmers
research has shown that a strength training program should not who underwent no supplemental aerobic training. Since
increase body mass, nor should it negatively impact aerobic swimmers already perform high volumes of endurance training
benchmarks such as VO2 max and capillarization, as long as in the pool, the potential for overtraining by incorporating
the swimmer maintains an aerobic training baseline alongside.1 aerobic sessions in dryland programs is of concern.
Because swimming takes place in an unstable medium, it With any dryland approach, it is critical that swimmers “earn
is advisable to incorporate unstable surface training into a their way” to the next level of difficulty. Swimmers should
dryland program. This training should not be the centerpiece, master the basics before advancing through more difficult
but can help bridge the gap between the land and the water. progressions en route to higher levels of dryland performance.
One effective modality is suspension training, which is most
popular commercially through the TRX training system. In
particular, exercises such as rowing and other posterior
shoulder exercises help counterbalance the repetitive postures
and movements in swimming and help train the core in a How strength training affects endurance performance
manner similar to the way it is trained in the water.
No increase in body mass Improvements in exercise economy
No reduced capillarization Improvements in lactate threshold
According to existing research, the type of strength training
No negative effect on VO2 max Improvements in maximal speed
most likely to improve swimming involves a small number of
Reduced fatigue Improvements in anaerobic capacity
repetitions (reps) at high intensity, with longer rest periods.
98 Dryland Training

--- Page 100 Text ---
o a
Workload management To set an appropriate dryland training Sprint strength Strength training
program, it helps to understand the workloads needed to elicit has the greatest potential to improve
positive adaptations in strength and power, depending on the training sprint performance. In a 12-week
goal. Strength training for swimming optimally should remain in the experiment, swimmers in a twice
‘strength’ and ‘power’ ranges shown here—that is, low repetition weekly strength training group
and high intensity. Higher repetition, lower intensity training, which underwent explosive dryland training,
promotes hypertrophy and muscular endurance, has not been shown following a regimen of three sets of 6
to elicit benefits for swimmers, and may lead to overtraining. The reps/set, at 80–90% of 1RM, for each
National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA) offers more of six different exercises. This group
detailed guidance on repetition and intensity ranges. improved their speeds by 2.8% over
a 55 yd (50 m) sprint, compared to
d Less is more In swimming, minimal dryland strength training 0.9% improvement in the control group 2.8 % 2.3% 0.9%
that was involved in an aerobic cycling
is needed to gain benefits, possibly because many swimmers are
program, and 2.3% in a group that
relatively untrained on land, compared to other athletes. Improvements
underwent resistance training in the
have been noted for sprint swimmers using only one exercise,
water using bands. All groups continued
following a regimen of three sets of 3 reps/set at 90% of one-
regular swim training throughout in
repetition maximum (90% of 1RM), two sets of 2 reps/set at 95% of
addition to any interventions.5
1RM, 1 rep at 100% of 1RM and 1 rep attempted at 100% of 1RM +
2 lb (1 kg). In only four weeks, training four times per week, swimmers
Dryland strength In-pool resistance
averaged a 7.3% increase in freestyle velocity over 55 yd (50 m).4
training group training group
3 reps/set at 90% of 1RM 2 reps/set at 95% of 1RM 1 o f r e 1 p R a M t 100% 1 o f r e 1 p R a M tt e + m 2 p t l e b d ( 1 a t k 1 g) 00%
99
)%(
)m
05(
dy
55
revo
emit
ni
tnemevorpmi
egatnecreP
Load Repetitions Rest between Fast improvement
Training goal Sets
(percentage of 1RM) per set sets (minutes)
Strength ≥85% ≤6 2–6 2–5 0.3
Power for a single-effort event 80–90% 1–2 3–5 2–5 A
Power for a multiple-effort event 75–85% 3–5 3–5 12–53
Hypertrophy (building muscle mass) 67–85% 6–12 3–6 0.5–1.5
B
Muscular endurance ≤67% ≥12 2–3 ≤0.5 0.2
0.1
C
0.0
improvement improvement improvement
A B C
Control group
Sprint performance

--- Page 101 Text ---
Could dryland training impair Does dryland
neural connections and training help or
impede swimming training? harm my swimming?
Many dryland programs use excessive volume and muscular Swimmers use many forms of dryland training, both in the
endurance training. Contrary to traditional thinking, swimmers weight room and on the pool deck, using various equipment
receive ample cardiovascular conditioning in the water and and bodyweight-only exercises. One common approach is to
should focus land training on domains such as strength, perform diverse exercises in rapid succession, known as circuit
power, and mobility rather than stamina and endurance. training. Training for peak performance should focus on the
least developed factor contributing to maximal power
Even at the beginner’s level, training can be time intensive. generation. This results in the greatest neuromuscular
Swimmers under 10 years old often spend more than five adaptation, and therefore in the most significant improvements
hours per week in pool training. At higher levels, training is in performance.1 Swimmers are generally deficient in factors
a nearly full-time occupation, involving upward of 30 hours such as neural activation and rate of force development, which
per week of active pool training. Compared to other sports, require optimal functioning of the nervous system to maximize
swimming performs a conditioning workload rivaled only by recruitment of primary motor units (motor nerve cells and the
elite cycling, Nordic skiing, and rowing. Based on this alone, skeletal muscle fibers they innervate). Neither quality is
swimmers should consider reducing, or even eliminating, maximally developed through high-volume circuit training,
cardiovascular conditioning activities in dryland training. in which strength training takes place concurrent with
cardiovascular demands, as the nervous system is unable to
“focus” on force development in specific muscles. Fortunately,
when training properly—taking plenty of rests between sets of
specific, targeted exercises—swimmers may experience gains
in these domains within 4–6 weeks.
Whether dryland training actually impairs swimming is difficult to
measure. But based on the science, we know that if you do not
train in the recommended ranges for adaptation, strength and
power gains will be limited, and your dryland program will only
be making you tired and sore.
g
In the mix A mixed training program maximizes rate of force
development and power. Ballistic or explosive training improves
Initial gradient of line shows rate of force development, by recruiting more motor units than in
rate of force development, ramped contractions, but cannot alone increase overall peak force
power =
or power
(strength) significantly. Heavy resistance training, on the other
hand, improves peak force, but does not result in a large increase
in rate of force development without explosive training too. A blend
Before training After heavy resistance training only of explosive and heavy resistance training is therefore the optimum
After ballistic training only After mixed training for enhancing power production.
)snotwen(
ecroF
Mixed training for maximal power
Level of line at plateau shows peak force (strength)
force
time
Time (milliseconds)
100 Dryland Training

--- Page 102 Text ---
d
Power up High power output underlies effective performance in many sports,
NEED TO KNOW
including swimming. Power is defined as the amount of work done per unit of time.
Rate of force development (RFD) So, while strength determines the maximum force an athlete can apply to a given
Rate of force development is a measure of an athlete’s explosive load, power is proportional to the speed at which the force is applied. In swimming,
strength, which depends on the speed at which muscle fibers can we can interpret this as the rate at which force is exerted by the muscles to propel
contract. Athletes with higher ra I t N es o F f fo O rce d e G velo R pm A ent P per H form I C bett e r CHt4he b_odyS thProug1h th_e w0ate1r. D_rylaEnd training programs can be designed to improve
maximal power output by focusing on particular types of exercises, such as ballistic,
in various physical performance tests. In trained athletes, only anaerobic
plyometric, and weightlifting exercises1, as outlined here. The consequent benefits
systemIN FtOr aGRiAnPiHnICg C,H 4s_SuP1c_h01 _aA_sSq uraetsistance anCd baollisutic epxerlceises ,o havfe bleienn e weights
of enhanced power production transfer well to performance in the pool.
shown to improve RFD.
INFO GRAPHIC CH4_SP1_01_B
“Window of adaptation”
Various neuromuscular factors
contribute to maximal power production, including
muscle mass and strength. Identifying the
individual’s least developed factor, and designing
Power production
a training program to focus on appropriate
neuromuscular adaptations, presents the greatest
potential for improvement in maximal power
output and, therefore, in performance for that
INFO GRAPHIC CH4_SP1_01_C
individual. In swimmers, rate of force
development (power) and neural
Strength activation are often the least
Since power involves both strength developed factors.
and speed, increasing strength is key
to improving power output. Heavy Ballistic
resistance training with loads ranging Ballistic training—which includes exercises such as
from 50% to 90% of 1RM can jump squats, bench throws, and push presses—is used
significantly increase to develop explosiveness and power. The athlete
peak force.1 accelerates and then releases the load, rather than slowly
decelerating it as in other forms of weight training. Ballistic
movements require coordination of the central nervous
system to recruit fast-twitch muscle fibers, which are
directly responsible for growth and strength, resulting
in enhanced rate of force development. Loads of up
to 50% of 1RM are found to be the most
Plyometric
effective for improving maximal power
In plyometrics, or “jump training,” the muscles
Variation in complex movements.1
exert maximum force in short time intervals,
It is thought that the greatest
in order to build power. For example, plyometric
long-term improvement in an
drills such as specialized repeated jumping involve
athlete’s maximal power output
muscles moving from extension to contraction
can be achieved by integrating a
in a rapid or explosive manner. In swim
variety of different power training
training, plyometric exercises should involve
techniques within the training
stretch rates that are similar to those
program, including both
encountered in the pool, and involve little
heavy resistance and
or no external resistance.
explosive exercises.
101

--- Page 103 Text ---
What type of core Will sit-ups and
training is beneficial crunches improve
for swimmers? my swimming?
The potential benefit of core training for swimming is a hotly of core training exercises on the performance of swimmers
debated topic and one on which there may never be a completing a sprint test.1 Among the exercises tested, the
consensus. Although core training is a staple in many dryland prone bridge endurance test (more commonly known as
programs, the formal literature supporting its effectiveness is the “plank”) and straight-arm pull-down exercise resulted in
sparse. There are several reasons for this void, but most moderate increases in strength and were correlated with a 2%
significant is that “core training” is such a broad term with many performance improvement in the swim test. On the other hand,
working definitions. Sit-ups, medicine ball training, unstable isometric strength tests and exercises performed on unstable
surface balancing and traditional weightlifting are among the surfaces had less transferability to swimming performance.
many tactics commonly associated with core training. Despite
the breadth of options available, it is possible to organize a set
of universal principles to guide training choices in this area.
Muscles of the core
It is perhaps easiest to begin with what not to do. Sit-ups,
crunches, and their various iterations are the most popular
class of core exercises in the swimming world—yet they should
probably be the first group of exercises to omit from a dryland Latissimus dorsi Erector spinae External oblique
training program. Recent evidence has shown that repeated
spinal flexion (bending forward, as in a sit-up or crunch
movement) increases the risk of low back damage, and
also tends to encourage the most common postural Multifidus
(deep) Rectus
deviations in the swimming population, such as rounded
abdominis
upper back and forward shoulders.
This is not to suggest that spinal flexion must always be
avoided. In fact, the ability to bend forward with power is
essential for optimal turns. But multiple turns do not occur
in rapid succession, so training the core to carry out sets of
Gluteus Internal oblique
repeated sit-ups and crunches is unlikely to bring directly Gluteus medius
maximus (deep)
(mostly behind
transferrable benefits. A better approach, if you choose to
gluteus maximus) Transverse
include forward bending in your core workouts, is to train this Gluteus minimus
abdominis
(behind gluteus
movement in lower volume, using fewer repetitions and longer (deep)
maximus)
rest periods than in traditional sit-up and crunch training.
A foundational principle of core training for swimmers is that
it should include a specific component for swimming function.
For example, a recent study compared the effects of a variety
102 Dryland Training

--- Page 104 Text ---
Developing core strength gd
Plane and simple There are several reasons
why a degree of swim specificity may be valuable for
dryland core training. In the plank and straight-arm
pull-down exercise, which have been shown to be
beneficial for swimmers,1 the core is positioned to
transfer load along the same angles and in the same
planes as demanded in the pool. In the endurance
plank, the body must maintain a streamlined position
Prone bridge endurance test (plank)
for an extended period of time, much as in most
swimming events. Likewise, in the straight-arm
pull-down the body must maintain stability in the
sagittal plane as the upper limbs are generating force,
which progresses high to low as with the pull in the
swim strokes. These exercises are only two of the many
available options for developing core strength—the key
components of core stabilization and directional pull
similar to that used in swim strokes can be used as
criteria to select other exercises particularly suited to
dryland swim training.
Body planes
Sagittal
plane
Straight-arm pull-down exercise
g
Getting to the core The core comprises far more than just the
“abs”—it includes deep muscles such as the diaphragm, pelvic floor
muscles, transverse abdominis, multifidus, and internal obliques, as Transverse plane
well as the more superficial external obliques, rectus abdominis,
Frontal (coronal)
latissimus dorsi, erector spinae, and gluteus muscles. Developing plane
core strength protects the spine, reduces back pain, improves
balance, stability and posture, and—when trained appropriately—
can also enhance swim-specific movement patterns.
103

--- Page 105 Text ---
e q u i p m e n t :
s t r e t c h c o r d s
In this age of complex training equipment, one of the different stroke phases added resistance may be helpful. In
simplest pieces is also one of the most effective and each of the four strokes, there are points at which stretch
versatile: the stretch cord. Stretch cords share many cords may be most effectively applied—for example, in
characteristics with the swim bench, but have certain freestyle these are during the early catch with a vertical
advantages over it. One obvious advantage is their forearm, the high elbow pull, and the finish at the back.
portability—stretch cords are light and flexible and
can be used almost anywhere. When using a stretch cord, it is key to ensure that posture is
optimal—even if your arm technique is good, you will defeat the
Seen on many pool decks, in gyms, and at rehabilitation purpose of the exercise if you perform it with poor posture.
facilities, stretch cords have historically been used in ways The most common flaw is to have a rounded back during stroke
driven largely by tradition rather than science—nevertheless, simulation. To execute the early vertical forearm and high elbow,
we can infer the mechanisms by which they may work. visualize pointing your fingers at the ground while maintaining
To get the best value from stretch cords in dryland training elbow position and ensuring that it does not lose height.
for swimmers, it is first important to determine where in the
There are many equipment options for dryland resistance
d
Stretching strength A key for any shoulder program is to train the shoulders training, and none is universally superior to the others. For
and upper back muscles in multiple planes of motion. Doing so will help address any example, barbell training can be useful, but is hardly the right
imbalances in the shoulders that develop through repetitive use in the water. When method for improving technique; stretch cords, on the other
programming for rehabilitation or a swimmer with an injury history, the balance of the hand, are versatile but are not sufficient for full-body power
program should be modified to address that swimmer’s weakness. As such, some
development. Overall, it’s crucial to deploy a range of equipment
planes of movement will receive extra emphasis while others will be deemphasized
in a manner that best leverages each piece’s inherent qualities,
or excluded altogether. This graphic shows abduction and adduction exercises in
to work toward the training adaptations you are seeking.
the transverse plane.
Shoulder strength
104 Dryland Training

--- Page 106 Text ---
Types of stretch cord
ga
Flexible Standard stretch cords have a
Standard
handle at each end, but there are products available
stretch cords
with paddles instead, to allow a swimmer to more
accurately replicate the upper limb positions and
actions of swimming.
Stretch cords
with paddles
Strength development for young swimmers
gd
Exercise anywhere Stretch cords can be used
for strength development. Although the loads may be
insufficient to challenge adolescent and older swimmers,
stretch cords are a valuable addition to dryland training for
young age group swimmers to teach basic lifting mechanics
Stretch cords can be looped
around any convenient pole as an introduction to strength training. Rows are one of the
or other firm attachment, to simplest exercises to implement.
perform resistance
exercises such as rows.
d Dry run Dryland stroke rehearsal is an important use for A range of cords are
available, providing different
stretch cords. It’s possible to replicate several key movements
levels of resistance—the
on land that many struggle with in the water. The early vertical resistance can also be
forearm paired with a high elbow catch is one movement that is increased by stretching
the cord further.
much easier to establish on land with the assistance of stretch
cords. The finish of the freestyle stroke is another phase of the
stroke cycle that can be rehearsed on land, with opportunities
for feedback that are difficult to create in the water.
Stroke rehearsal
Exercise to practice early vertical
forearm with a high elbow catch
and finish, in freestyle.
105

--- Page 107 Text ---
Can dryland plyometrics Will exercises such as
enhance performance in jumping and agility
the water? training help me
swim better?
Plyometric training involves rapid, “explosive” actions, in which movements, research has shown that plyometric training does
the muscles contract with maximum force in a short time, in improve glide speed and stroke velocity.3
order to build power. For example, plyometrics often include
jumping, sprinting, and agility drills, and are commonly used Regardless of any direct benefits for swimming, plyometric
in dryland training programs for swimmers. While we aren’t training has been shown to increase general measures of
certain if these drills directly aid swimming, there is reason to athletic ability (such as jumping, sprinting, endurance, and
believe that such exercises may enhance starts and turns. agility) and to reduce injury risk, which may help improve
For example, a study of trained adolescent swimmers found durability for other forms of dryland training. Thus, plyometrics
that, while plyometric training did not change the take-off may have an indirect effect on swimming performance, not
and airborne properties of the start, it was associated with felt in the short term.
improvements in overall time to the 6 yd (5.5 m) mark in the
pool.1 However, a different study, comparing swimmers who Gains in a plyometric program should be noticeable within an
trained using plyometrics and swimmers who trained solely eight-week training protocol of 2–3 sessions per week. Due to
in the water, found no difference in turn performance between the demanding nature of plyometrics, especially for athletes
the two groups.2 Though conventional wisdom might suggest not fully conditioned to repeated ground impacts, adequate
that plyometrics would have limited direct benefit for swimmers, recovery is essential between repetitions, with a minimum of a
because the trained movements it involves—such as jumping 1:10 work-to-rest ratio. This augmented rest interval allows the
and bounding—are not specifically related to swimming body to increase neural drive to working muscles—which may
The stretch-shortening cycle
a A Eccentric phase
The reflex The stretch-shortening cycle is the basis
As the athlete sinks into a squat, the agonist
of plyometric exercise. It harnesses both the elastic muscle groups in the calf and thigh are
energy stored during the rapid musculo-tendinous stretched. Elastic energy is stored, and muscle
spindles are stimulated, which triggers impulses
stretch of eccentric muscle action, and the increased
in sensory neurons as part of the stretch reflex.
neural drive resulting from the stretch reflex, to optimize
the force produced during subsequent concentric
B Amortization phase
muscle action. By combining both mechanical and neurophysiological
A This is the rapid transition from eccentric to
mechanisms in this way, plyometric exercises such as repeated squat C concentric phases, during which impulses in
jumps maximize muscle recruitment over a minimal amount of time. sensory neurons pass to motor neurons via
synapses in the spinal cord.
Plyometric training has been shown to elicit a number of physiological B
adaptations, including increased muscle size and strength, increased
bone density, increased tendon stiffness and reduction in energy C Concentric phase
dissipation allowing more efficient muscle action, and—perhaps This phase comprises the entire push-off time,
until the athlete’s foot leaves the surface. Motor
most significantly—increased neural drive to agonist muscles.
neurons stimulate agonist muscle fibers to
contract rapidly (neurophysiological), and elastic
energy is simultaneously released (mechanical).
106 Dryland Training

--- Page 108 Text ---
be responsible for the in-water improvements found in glide d Jump to it The effects on front crawl performance of plyometric training, in
and stroke velocity3 despite the fact that the exercise addition to the usual swim program, were studied in a group of 14-year-olds.3 The
movements are not specific to swimming. swimmers were assigned either to a control group, or to a test group. Both groups
underwent 5.5 hours per week of swim training during a six-week block. In addition,
the test group also underwent plyometrics before swimming training two times per
It is important to note that many studies on the effects of
week, involving squat jumps and counter movement jumps as shown here. The test
plyometric training in swimmers include control groups who
group showed a small but significant improvement in front crawl speed over 50 m
performed no alternative dryland training. A more realistic
and 400 m, compared to the control group, and there was also a significant
inquiry would compare plyometrics to other forms of dryland
correlation between improvement in jump performance and increased swim speed
training, as well as studying interactions between different types
over 50 m, suggesting that plyometric
of training programs. Additionally, much of the formal research
training may have a positive effect on The CMJ involves short-duration
on the topic is restricted to narrow age groups of adolescents swimmers’ performance, particularly pre-loading of the agonist muscles
with a varying range of swim experience. involving diving and turning maneuvers. and tendons followed by immediate
contraction. It provides a greater
degree of plyometric movement
compared to the squat jump.
In a CMJ (counter movement
Squat jump jump) the athlete starts in a Counter movement jump
standing straddle position (A),
squats down rapidly (B) and
then immediately jumps up
from that position (C).
The squat jump
(SJ) is performed
from a static
A B C
squatting position
Start performance d Quick off the mark An eight-week study looking
Change in time to 6 yd at the effects of additional plyometric training on start
Change in take-off velocity
(5.5 m): 0.38 s
(m s–1): 0.12 m s–1 performance1 in adolescent swimmers revealed a
significantly greater improvement in time to the 6 yd
(5.5 m) mark in the “plyometric” group compared to the
control group. It also showed a significant improvement
in velocity of take-off from the starting block in the
–0.07 m s–1 group who experienced plyometric exercises in addition
to their normal swim training. Since start performance
is so critical to swimming success, this evidence
suggests that inclusion of plyometrics in the training
programs of adolescent swimmers should be beneficial.
0.19 m s–1
0.21 s
Standard swim training plus plyometrics (test group)
Standard swim training only (control group) 0.59 s
107

--- Page 109 Text ---
Does resistance training How young can kids start
at a young age impair a training with weights and
child’s growth? other forms of resistance?
Resistance training describes any exercise in which resistance is Resistance test
applied to the body’s work. This can be in the form of external
weights, but resistance can also be applied using nothing more
Power training group
than one’s own bodyweight—push ups and pull ups are
Standard training group
examples of bodyweight resistance exercises. Nearly everyone
agrees that the latter form of resistance training is not only safe,
it is essential for optimal youth development, for athletes and
non-athletes alike. Kids will undergo some forms of resistance
training as they simply play various everyday games.
135 N
Bodyweight training is nearly universal among youth swim
programs, and rightfully so. Coaches should introduce
120 N
swimmers to some form of resistance training at a young age
so that their first exposure won’t be at high school or college, 100 N
where the dryland program is likely to be more intense.
90 N
Although the evidence connecting dryland training directly to
swimming performance remains uncertain, in the younger age
groups performance gains are not the priority in any case—
injury prevention and establishing a base for the future are most
important. Coaches should not feel that their young swimmers
are at a disadvantage if they only have access to bodyweight.
The main discussion involves whether young kids should train
with external weights. A common belief is that training with
weights will stunt a child’s growth, but this is unsupported in
the scientific literature.1,2 While improper training can cause
musculoskeletal injuries, there is no evidence that a properly
designed weight-training regimen would either cause injuries
or delay optimal growth. In fact, the overall evidence suggests
that a properly designed resistance training program offers
numerous benefits for young athletes, including improved body
composition, more robust self-esteem, greater opportunities for
social interaction, strength development, power, athleticism, and
injury prevention. Additionally, there is some evidence that the 1000 1000 1000 1000
N N N N
inclusion of resistance training might have an effect on swim
performance, though this remains subject to ongoing debate.3 Pre test Post test
1,000N 1,000N 1,000N 1,000N
108 Dryland Training
Pre test Post test

--- Page 110 Text ---
Age 5–12 resistance training gd When to begin It is almost impossible to assign a
milestone date at which kids should start resistance training
Power kicks and leg raises
but some guidelines are available. At a very early age, children
are learning fundamental motor skills and building the
Running and skipping
neuromuscular pathways needed for coordination. The simplest
exercises are appropriate, and most important is making
movement and exercise a positive and social experience. Five
Climbing is generally considered the earliest age at which kids should
begin structured resistance training, which should comprise
Wall sits
bodyweight-only exercises such as push ups, monkey bars, and
any other playful activities providing resistance to movement.
Start basic strength training by
Formal weight room exercises such as bench pressing should
introducing young children to many
different sports and fun activities— be saved for later years. It is vital to take into account the
emphasis on just one can lead to individual’s stage of development—two kids of the same age
burnout, boredom, and repetitive motion
might be at entirely different stages of physical and mental
injuries. Teach fundamental skills
for agility, strength, and endurance, growth. One twelve-year-old may be ready for formal weight
as well as specific sports skills. training while another may be safer remaining in a bodyweight
Push ups
training program. If in doubt, it is best to err on the side of
and planks
Swimming caution and wait longer—many swimmers have enjoyed success
and pool play without picking up a weight through their adolescent years.
Age 13–20 resistance training
Bridges Crunches and
medicine ball throws
Triceps kickbacks
Bench presses
Teens can get into more advanced
strength and conditioning training but
g Taking the strain Although the evidence associating always focus on socializing, building
self-esteem, and developing a regular
resistance training with enhanced swimming performance is not
and consistent workout routine,
great, in one study comparing an experimental group of young promoting an active and healthy
swimmers whose training included a power program with an lifestyle into adulthood.
equivalent group who underwent swim training only, a significant
improvement of tethered swimming force was found for the
experimental group over a six-week period, whereas the increase
was not statistically significant from pre-test to post-test
conditions in the control group.3 (The tethered swimming force
Barbell squats
was determined by connecting the swimmers to a 1000 N load
with four strain gauges attached using commercial elastic cord. Lunge and press
Strength was evaluated in tests over 10 seconds.)
109

--- Page 111 Text ---
m e a s u r i n g d r y l a n d
SCIENCE
IN ACTION
p e r f o r m a n c e
We are currently in an era of measurement in sports science. Nearly
every form of biomechanical and physiological output can be measured.
Unfortunately, swimming lags behind other sports in this respect simply
because making measuring equipment waterproof incurs an additional
layer of cost. However, land-based technologies are equally accessible
to swimmers and non-swimmers alike—they can be divided into
three categories according to what they measure: readiness, output,
or technique.
A swimmer’s readiness can be assessed by simple observation: is the swimmer
showing signs of fatigue, rapid weight loss, or other abnormal indicators? Dryland
training offers a coach the closest perspective to conduct such observations. Another
simple readiness measurement technology is a questionnaire, asking swimmers
questions in either written or spoken form. More in-depth assessments using blood
testing can be extremely useful to monitor various biomarkers.
Traditionally, the primary output measure of dryland performance has simply been
whatever is the main goal of the exercise—the weight lifted, or the height jumped, for
example. Among the new output measurement technologies now available are force
plates, electromyography (see pages 174–175), and bar speed trackers, which allow
coaches to look deeper into the performance of an exercise. Force plates are
commonly used in high-impact activities but can also be used during stationary
lifts to measure how the athlete interacts with the ground. Swimmers often feel out of
place on land, and force plate data can be used as a teaching aid to accelerate their
proficiency. Electromyography reveals which muscles are firing and to what degree,
while bar speed trackers measure how fast the bar is moving during barbell lifts.
The most common way to observe and measure dryland technique is using video
cameras, which have become dramatically more portable in recent years. For many
athletes, video footage is a reality check on the soundness of their lifting technique,
especially for swimmers who may be inexperienced with dryland lifting. Three- a
Observing dryland performance
dimensional motion capture can break down technique by body segment and
French swimmer Laure Manaudou lifts
provide even more detailed feedback.
weights during a training session in
Val-d’Isère, French Alps. Nothing replaces
hard work, but harnessing technology can
improve our return on investment.
110 Dryland Training

--- Page 113 Text ---
Does visualization Can visualizing my
help develop performance help
neural networks? me swim better?
One of the new horizons in swim performance is the use of and physical practice. Mental practice cannot teach you to do
mental training outside the pool. Although many perceive mental something for which you have never physically trained—but it
training as building toughness to persist through difficult practice can help you achieve a greater return on investment for the
and race schedules, it certainly transcends that limited scope. time you spend in the water, improving the quality of practice.
Mental training outside the pool is traditionally not considered
part of dryland training but can have profound effects to
complement physical training, both in and out of the pool.1,2 Effect of visualization training
Time (s) to swim 1000 yd
For you to perform optimally, your brain must have an idea of
631.5 630.9 729.4 685.8 756.5 747.2 781.0 767.0
your intention. Because swimming training is so embedded in
routine, we often overlook our ability to control our thoughts.
Conscious thought and visualization of your intended actions
can be vital in many swimming contexts—for example,
visualizing stroke mechanics and strategy in preparation for
a race. Mental imagery also helps to sustain technique during
times of fatigue by creating a more robust mental imprint upon
which the swimmer can rely when physical duress increases.3
In addition, visualization practice can help maintain neural
networks during times of physical idleness—during rehabilitation
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, for example.
Even if the body loses function mechanically, the nervous
system remains primed for a return to the pool so the swimmer
loses minimal progress upon resuming a normal training load.
Neurological changes resulting from mental training are
tangible—research has shown an increase in neurotransmitter
release after visualization practice by competitive swimmers.4
The practical implications are profound. Not only can you
potentially get more out of your practice, but also—some
suggest—the body could be spared overtraining by replacing
physical training with mental training. That is, visualization may
Without
allow swimmers to access different training adaptations without visualization
wearing the body down. There are still questions about whether
After using
visualization training could cause overtraining of the nervous
visualization
system, but thus far no research has explored that possibility. techniques
Overall, the best results come from combining mental imagery
Participant 1 Participant 2 Participant 3 Participant 4
112 Dryland Training

--- Page 114 Text ---
Visualization practice
For optimal performance,
swimmers can use specific
imagery to decrease or increase
arousal, or to refocus when
faced with distractions during
practice or competition.
Imagery can be used as an
additional form of practice to
help swimmers master skills and
techniques. For example, swimmers
may visualize themselves executing
perfect stroke mechanics prior to
a pool training session.
To prepare for competition,
swimmers can familiarize
themselves with the competitive
environment and rehearse their
performance through visualization.
Experts recommend involving as
much of the sensory panorama
as possible—not only the race,
but also the sounds of the pool
area, the smell of chlorine,
and so on.
Using imagery to experience
success and the achievement of
goals helps to enhance swimmers’
self-confidence. It also provides the
motivation to maintain persistence
and intensity level during training
and competition.
g o
Seeing is believing Imagery techniques do seem to have a measurable Just imagine Visualization is important for swimmers not only to see and feel
influence on swimmers’ performance. In one study, performance times on a success, but to rehearse specific patterns of neural activity, to enhance subsequent
1000 yd practice set were collected for four swimmers over a 15-week period physical practice. There is a lot of “downtime” between events at swim meets, so
during pre-season training.2 After week 4, a visualization training intervention took having a mental plan to maintain engagement is vital, especially for swimmers
place over three weeks. The results showed that three of the four participants who struggle bringing their best performances from practice to competition.
significantly improved their times on the 1000 yd practice set after being Swimmers can also use imagery to develop strategies to overcome “unexpected”
introduced to the imagery techniques. situations—if they have rehearsed it in their minds, they will know how to deal with it.
113

--- Page 115 Text ---
What type of flexibility Which stretches
training best enhances will improve my
swimming-specific swimming?
range of motion?
Flexibility training must be purposeful, appropriate for the For example, static stretching is not advised in pre-event warm-
setting, and individually tailored. Swimmers practice flexibility ups as it has been shown to decrease power output. After
training to achieve ranges of motion necessary to execute swimming, though, while the body is still warm, static stretching
swim-specific movements. For example, joint mobility exercises can help improve flexibility with less likelihood of injury. Static
targeted at the hips, shoulders, thoracic spine, and ankles may flexibility exercises also help the body cool down after a
be prioritized, as these are the areas in which flexibility is most workout—each stretch should be held for 20–60 s, as going
important in swimming. A wide range of practices can be any longer yields no further benefits. Though not specifically
included within flexibility training—stretching is just one of stretching, myofascial release using a foam roller helps improve
several methods by which flexibility can be addressed. flexibility without any decrease in power generation.1
Dynamic stretching includes exercises such as arm circles and Although flexibility training is typically advised, in some
leg swings, in which muscles and joints are not held in one circumstances injury history and personal characteristics
position, but instead moved through a full range in a controlled supersede the general considerations. For example, swimmers
action. Pre-event warm-ups usually involve dynamic stretching, with hypermobility can move a joint beyond its normal range of
which not only helps to elevate core body temperature but also motion—knees and elbows that bend backward are common
rehearses key movements, such as ensuring the shoulders can examples. Because hypermobile swimmers often present with
safely execute the range of motion required by stroke mechanics. a history of shoulder instability, additional stretching can make
Static stretching involves taking a muscle or joint near its them more unstable, so they should focus on stability exercises,
maximum range and holding for a sustained length of time. It can and possibly reducing flexibility, as a relationship has been
improve specific ranges of motion but is not always appropriate. shown between joint laxity and shoulder pain in swimmers.2
Dynamic stretching, before training Static stretching, after training
g
Shoulder Compound dynamic Stretching a point Generally, guidelines suggest using
internal rotation stretch—shoulder dynamic stretching before a training session or competition event,
extension with hip,
and focusing on static flexibility after training (if at all). For
knee and ankle flexion
swimmers, emphasis should be placed on improving flexibility
in the shoulders, upper spine, hips, and ankles. Swimmers’
individual qualities and context must always be taken into
consideration, however.
Leg stretch Shoulder and upper
spine stretch
114 Dryland Training

--- Page 116 Text ---
o Flexibility in strength Many studies have been the rotator cuff can translate into flexibility
conducted assessing the effect of stretching on improvement, hence the inclusion of both types of
swimming performance. One recent study relevant exercises in the study. Of the 44 swimmers who took
to the highly competitive population was conducted to part, the intervention group completed a program
assess the effectiveness of a six-week strengthening of strengthening and flexibility exercises using
and stretching program in improving shoulder resistance tubing three times per week for six weeks.
strength in college swimmers.3 Although These swimmers showed small improvements in
strengthening is different from stretching, there is many areas, but shoulder extension and shoulder
reason to believe that strength improvements within internal rotation strength were significantly increased.
115
)%(
thgiew
ydob
fo
egatnecrep
sa
,detrexe
ecroF
)%(
thgiew
ydob
fo
egatnecrep
sa
,detrexe
ecroF
Shoulder internal rotation strength
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
Flexibility trained group Control group
Shoulder extension strength
30
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
Flexibility trained group Control group
Before intervention
After intervention

--- Page 117 Text ---
Does dryland stroke Should I use a swim
rehearsal on a swim bench to practice my
bench improve motor stroke on land?
learning in the water?
A swim bench is often touted as an effective way to supplement into a zone of diminishing marginal benefits. Although the
the training load in the pool and plays an integral role in many cardiorespiratory demands of the swim bench are less than
teams’ dryland preparation. For teams whose pool time is for actual swimming, the musculoskeletal demands are similar.1
limited, swim bench training provides the closest equivalent to Additionally, users should understand that the swim bench
swimming, and it can also allow refinement of stroke mechanics may allow muscle asymmetries to persist, without exercises
not easily achievable in the water. specifically targeted to address those areas.2
For a beginner, a swim bench offers the opportunity of real- Furthermore, although the arm movements during bench
time feedback from the coach, which is nearly impossible training may look very similar to what swimmers perform in
during a team practice in the pool. Achieving optimal stroke the water, stroke mechanics include a vast array of visually
mechanics can involve joint angles highly foreign to someone imperceptible microadjustments to manipulate the water for
with little swim experience. When used properly, the swim optimal balance and orientation. Additionally, although much
bench can accelerate the learning process and make time in of the focus is on arm mechanics with the swim bench, a
the water more effective. For more advanced swimmers, the bigger disparity between the pool and dryland conditions
greatest benefit of the swim bench is in tackling qualities that lies in the trunk and lower body. Unlike freestyle in the pool,
are more difficult to address in the water. The enhanced during which the trunk rotates noticeably and the lower
conditioning resulting from swim bench training may also allow body participates actively in balance and propulsion, the
swimmers to better maintain stroke mechanics under duress. trunk and lower body sustain isometric contractions against
the belt when on the swim bench.
Balanced against these potential benefits is the risk of
overtraining. Swimmers already train very large distances each
week and adding swim bench dryland work could bring them
Pros and cons
Swim bench training can offer significant benefits, but the potential downsides should also be considered.
Benefits Drawbacks
• Allows maximum communication with the coach • Potential overtraining
• Isolates key parts of the stroke for refinement • Trunk and leg muscles are supported, unlike in water
• Teaches mechanics to beginners without apprehension of the water • Does not train microadjustments that occur in the water
• Increases training load • Asymmetries persist, without other focused training
116 Dryland Training

--- Page 118 Text ---
Stroke practice
g
On the bench The swim bench is often used as an adjunct
High-elbow catch, as the arm enters
the water at the start of the stroke to pool training. Propulsion on the swim bench requires many of
the same biomechanical actions required for effective freestyle
and butterfly (the two strokes most commonly trained on swim
benches): high elbow catch (A), maintained high elbow during
the pull (B), and arm extension to finish the stroke (C).
Maintaining high elbow
A
during the pull
Arm extension to finish the stroke
B
C
In the eccentric phase,
during the later part of the
Eccentric phase
stroke, muscle contractions
work against the resistance
in the bands
a
Eccentric actions For the advanced swimmer,
because of the added force it requires to initiate
the propulsive phase,3 the swim bench may be
particularly valuable to focus on this part of the
stroke, in freestyle and butterfly, though the middle
and end phases can also be isolated for refinement.
Additionally, swimmers can train the eccentric
phase of the stroke, which is nearly impossible
in the pool—after performing a pull, the
eccentric phase can be trained by controlling In the propulsive phase, muscles
the paddles as they tend to rise toward the contract concentrically to pull
the hands backward
front of the machine. Stroke tempo variation
can also be practiced.
117

--- Page 119 Text ---
Is a dynamic dryland Will warming up before
warm-up necessary? getting in the pool help
me in the water?
Swimmers have two primary warm-up strategies available: in For example, performing countermovement jumps beforehand
the water and on land. Coaches typically plan a pool warm-up has been shown to improve swim start performance.3 Coaches
before the main swimming set, but a significant portion of the must be sure to test such strategies in practice, however, before
whole warm-up session often occurs on land. One reason for employing them in competition situations as excessively heavy
this is that, at competitions, the warm-up pool may be chaotic loads may create soreness and impair performance. As with
and crowded, forcing swimmers to warm up elsewhere. any warm-up format, it is critical to find the right balance of
Swimmers may also have long waits between the end of their intensities for each individual.
allocated in-water warm-up period and their race—to stay
warm and loose, the only choice is to use a dryland warm-up.
Evidence shows that a wait of approximately 10–15 minutes
between the end of the in-water warm-up and the start of
the race will not affect performance, but waiting excessively
(for 45 minutes or longer) may impair performance.1,2 Although
research has not yet specifically looked at the impact on
performance of a dryland warm-up during the wait, we can
infer that it may help bridge that time gap.
Ideally, the warm-up session should be as routine as possible,
but in practice it may vary widely depending on circumstances.
The optimal warm-up for competition may be different from the
best format for a training session, when the warm-up can be
open ended and gradually flow into the main swimming set if the
coach desires. Some consider that warm-up swimming is often
of poor quality, partially reinforcing bad habits. For this reason,
coaches may forego part of the swim warm-up and instead
transfer some warm-up exercises to land. One objective of
the warm-up is simply to elevate core temperature, which is
not specific to swim mechanics and can be accomplished
on land, saving the in-water warm-up for stroke rehearsal.
o
Jump to it “Priming” the muscles using certain movements may improve
Another reason a dryland warm-up may be valuable for
subsequent performance, through what is known as post-activation potentiation.
swimmers is that the start of a race occurs on land. It is critical,
For example, one study showed a significant increase in both peak horizontal force
especially for sprint events, to achieve a powerful start, and the and peak vertical force in a swim start after a warm-up involving countermovement
warm-up should address this need adequately. Post-activation jumps (see pages 106–107), compared to after a swim-specific warm up, as long as
potentiation can play a role here—this is the phenomenon by adequate recovery (of about 8 min) is allowed between the warm-up and the start.4
which prior muscular output improves subsequent performance.
118 Dryland Training
)N(
ecrof
lacitrev
kaeP
Swim start improvement
1550
Swim start after swim-specific warm-up
Swim start after dryland warm-up
(performing countermovement jumps)
1518
1500
1462
Peak horizontal force (N)
1450
750 770 800 814 850

--- Page 120 Text ---
Dryland warm-up exercises d All in the preparation Evidence has shown that there may be little difference
between the benefits of a swim warm-up and a dryland warm-up, in terms of their
effect upon subsequent sprint swim performance in college swimmers. A study
compared the effects of an in-water warm-up, a dryland warm-up, and no warm-up
at all.4 The swimmers’ subsequent times for 100 yd (91 m) freestyle were
significantly better when they had warmed up than when they had not, but the slight
Core body variance between performances following swim warm-up and dryland warm-up was
warm up
not significantly different. In recent years, some coaches have completely omitted
Light exercises to warm up
the core body temperature in-water warm-ups for their swimmers and warm-up exclusively on land. Although
e.g. jumping jacks, running the research in this area is still developing, there are indications that a dryland-only
in place, using a
warm-up can be effective.
stationary bike
Slight variations
Average time (seconds) for 100 yd freestyle
60 60.5 61
Motor control
Motor control exercises
e.g. practicing the catch
and pull with light
resistance bands
Plyometric
exercises
e.g. explosive jumps
and landings, medicine
Dynamic
ball work
flexibility stretches
Dynamic flexibility
stretches e.g. arm and
leg swings, arm circles,
running drills
o
Warming to the idea Objectives for the warm-up include elevating core
body temperature, rehearsing movement patterns, enhancing mental readiness,
and providing brief exposure to different energy systems to minimize the shock
of intense training or racing. Dryland warm-up exercises might include some of
the exercises shown above.
Swim warm-up Dryland warm-up No warm-up
119

--- Page 121 Text ---
Does increased sleep If I sleep more will
improve recovery? I perform better?
For decades, swimming culture has glorified sleep deprivation. choice but to practice in the pre-dawn hours, if they are to put
The willingness to endure years of early morning practices in sufficient training time—but a 4 am wake-up call can make
has been a source of pride for swimmers who persist in the eight hours of sleep nearly impossible for those with busy
sport while others drop out due to the challenging lifestyle. schedules, especially if evening practices end late.
Unfortunately, sleep deprivation has also been linked to poor
recovery, injury, and illness. Though the science of sleep and Planning practice schedules carefully to avoid excessive impact
its importance has become well established in recent years, on sleep time, either early in the morning or late in the evening,
changing cultural norms in the sport is a slower process. Most is clearly vital. Effective scheduling may also implement the
important is to educate coaches, swimmers, and parents, and concept of “sleep banking.” This involves including periods in
allow them to make decisions based on the available science. which swimmers sleep extra hours to compensate for periods
in which they must sleep less, because of training pressures.
Swimmers face many unique challenges with sleep, most Research involving military personnel has shown that subjects
notably the routine of very early morning practices. In an ideal improved in all psychomotor vigilance tasks when seven-day
world, practices would occur during the day, with opportunities and five-day sleep-banking periods bracketed a seven-day
for naps and refueling. Many college programs hold practices period of sleep deprivation, during which subjects slept only
during daytime hours to alleviate concerns about the impact on three hours per night.1 Such a design may be impractical for
sleep of early morning or late evening training, but this is rarely a swim training program, but the general principle remains—
practical for age-group swimmers, who must attend school swimmers should exploit whatever opportunities they can
classes during the day. Many of these swimmers have no to “sleep bank.”
Effects of sleep deprivation
g
• Sleep deprivation can impact autonomic nervous system Sleeping it off Evidence suggests that most athletes,
function, leading to symptoms of overtraining syndrome. including swimmers, sleep far less than eight hours per
• A reduction in periods of deep sleep, when growth night, despite the fact that the numerous negative effects
hormone is normally released, can lead to impaired
of sleep deprivation are well documented. These include
tissue regeneration and development.
decreased autonomic nervous system function, immune
• Reduction in quality and quantity of sleep Training
may increase release of inflammatory cytokines, function and cognition, and increased symptoms of
leading to weakened immune system function. overtraining syndrome and risk of injury. Nervous system
• Athletes who sleep less than 8 hours per night recovery, musculoskeletal regeneration, and immune
Training
are 1.7 times more likely to suffer injury.
robustness are all basic physiological processes that occur
• Diminished cognitive function in alertness,
naturally in the training recovery process but are
reaction time, memory, and decision making is
associated with a lack of sleep. Sleep undermined when sleep is inadequate. Indeed, sleep has
• Perceptual and motor learning following training been described as the cheapest, most effective recovery
continue during sleep, so insufficient sleep leads to modality available—while many swimmers spend
poor retention of new techniques and strategies.
significant money on supplements and recovery tools,
sleep is hardwired into our behavior from birth.
120 Dryland Training

--- Page 122 Text ---
Sleep banking
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Sleep
4 am
Practice
5 am
School
6 am
Swim meet
7 am
8 am
9 am
10 am
11 am
noon
1 pm
2 pm
3 pm
4 pm
5 pm
6 pm
7 pm
8 pm
9 pm
10 pm
11 pm
midnight
1 am
2 am
3 am
4 am
o
Banking on it Modifying practice schedules to incorporate
Sleep hygiene
“sleep banking” is one way to try to combat the negative impacts
Sleep hygiene is a critical, yet often overlooked, part of the sleep equation. of long swim training hours on sleep patterns. The chart shows an
Darkness and a cool temperature are both recommended as the best conditions example of this kind of planning, for an age-group swim team—notice
to encourage sleep. Also of concern is the role of electronics. There is some the greater amount of sleep time allocated on Sundays, including an
evidence that electronics such as cell phones and tablets can disrupt normal afternoon nap. Some swimmers have difficulty calming down
sleeping patterns. Weaning anyone from their devices may be impossible these sufficiently after evening sessions to fall asleep quickly, which is
days, but at the very least, wherever the swimmer sleeps should not be a place important if they have an early wake-up. If this pattern repeats week
on week, swimmers can enter a zone of insufficient recovery, so it’s
where they are also playing on their phones or other devices.
key to allow an adequate period between the end of evening training
and “bed time,” wherever possible. If naps are possible mid week,
then swimmers should certainly take advantage of that opportunity.
121

--- Page 123 Text ---
Does dryland aerobic Will I swim better
training improve if I run, bike, or go
swimming performance? to spin class?
Most would agree that strength training has a role in a dryland There are circumstances in which dryland aerobic training may
program, but what about supplemental aerobic training such be useful. For example, if a team has restricted pool hours and
as cycling, running, rowing, and even swim bench training can’t train at the level they need in the water, supplementary
(see pages 116–117)? Swimmers already perform high aerobic activities may fill that gap. Supplementary aerobic
volumes of in-pool aerobic exercise, and walk such a fine line dryland can also help swimmers maintain general aerobic
between being optimally prepared and suffering overtraining fitness during off-season or recovery blocks, while providing
that additional dryland cardio work might easily put them over a mental respite from staring at the black line.
the edge. Assuming that a team is training at a high level in
the pool, one would expect their training tolerance to be at or
near its maximum. And since the transferability of benefits
from many dryland activities to swimming is unproven, the
g
All in the timing Not only are order,
point of diminishing returns from such cross training may
timing, and frequency of training modalities
arrive earlier than expected.
critical to ensure aerobic training does not
impair strength gains, these guidelines are
Aerobic training may also reduce swimmers’ benefits from
also key for maximizing the benefit of the
dryland strength training. Though scientific research is still
aerobic training, as the interference effect
seeking to define a specific rule for the relationship between
works both ways. In one study, a 24 h gap
aerobic and strength training on land, in reality each swimmer’s between strength and cardio training
adaptation will be different, as will the specific circumstances appears to result in the greatest
in which the training is applied. Overall though, the potential improvements in VO2 max, a common
benefits from supplementary aerobic training may be measure of cardiovascular endurance.1
outweighed by the potential risks of impairing strength-related Another study showed that weekly maximal
dryland gains. strength training sessions did not negatively
influence endurance performance in a
competitive swimmers’ program, suggesting Another practical consideration is that aerobic land activities,
that more frequent intervention may indeed
especially those involving repeated strain, may cause injury in
have an adverse effect. 2
swimmers. For example, by default, running tends to be the
aerobic dryland activity of choice, in part because it is much
A
cheaper and more convenient than rowing, cycling, or cross-
country skiing. The problem with running is that swimmers can
easily develop repetitive use injuries. So, despite the lack of A Strength training only
convenience, dryland programs should prioritize lower impact B 24 h gap between strength
modes of aerobic training such as rowing or cycling. and cardio training
C 6 h gap between strength
and cardio training
D No gap between strength
and cardio training
122 Dryland Training
)%(
xam
2OV
,etunim
rep
ekatpu
negyxo
ni
esaercnI
Timing for performance
10
B
9
8
7
6
C
D
5
4
3
2
1
0

--- Page 124 Text ---
o
Mind the gap The degree to which cardio or aerobic appears to be optimal so that the two sessions don’t adversely
training may diminish the benefits of strength training in a affect each other, and indeed under these circumstances the
concurrent program appears to depend on the timing of sessions cardio training appears to enhance the strength gains achieved.1
focused on each modality. It is not enough to place the strength Since maximal strength training has been found to be an
session before any aerobic session to minimize the interference effective protocol in improving swim performance,2 it’s
effect. Research has shown that when there is no rest time important to plan cardio training carefully—both in and out of
between strength and cardio training, strength gains are the pool—so as not to undermine strength gains. Overall,
reduced compared to athletes who underwent strength training aerobic dryland training should be kept to two sessions per
only. At least six hours between strength and aerobic sessions week at most, to avoid interference and overtraining.
123
)%(
tnemevorpmi
htgnerts
evitaleR
Planning strength and aerobic training sessions
C
B
30 A
D C
25
B B C
20 D D A
A
C
15
A B
D
10
Countermovement
5
jump
Bench row
0
Half squat
A Strength training only
B 24 h gap between strength and cardio training
C 6 h gap between strength and cardio training
D No gap between strength and cardio training
Bench press

--- Page 125 Text ---
Proper nutrition can have an important impact on the overall health,
robustness, composition, and resiliency of a swimmer, as well as having
direct performance and training enhancing effects. The implementation
of sport nutrition principles such as appropriate caloric intake, specific
nutrient intake and distribution, fluid and electrolyte balance, and
appropriate supplementation, is essential to optimize the performance
of a competitive swimmer. Furthermore, consideration of how an
optimal nutrition program may vary depending on circumstances,
individual preferences, physical and mental needs, and fluctuations
in the athlete’s training and competition schedule, allows for the
effective implementation of these principles for individual swimmers
across the course of their athletic career.

--- Page 126 Text ---
c h a p t e r f i v e
n u t r i t i o n
Kevin Iwasa-Madge

--- Page 127 Text ---
What are the caloric How much should I
requirements for eat to swim better?
swimming?
Swimming is a form of physical activity that requires the Submersion in cold water can lead to increases in resting
activation of a broad range of muscles in the body. As for any metabolism as the body increases metabolic heat production
exercise that requires a large amount of muscular activation, in an attempt to maintain core body temperatures. The increase
energy expenditure during swimming will be relatively high. in resting metabolism is proportional to the decrease in core
According to the Compendium of Physical Activities, swimming body temperature. Additionally, the relative energy cost of
has a metabolic equivalent (MET) of 6–11 METs depending exercise can be higher in colder water because oxygen
on the stroke and intensity of swimming.1 This means that delivery can be reduced.2,3
a swimmer will expend 2.5–5.0 Calories per pound of body
mass per hour of swimming (6–11 kcal/kg/h). For an Practically speaking, all of this additional swimming-specific
average-sized swimmer of 180 lb (82 kg), during an hour energy expenditure needs to be replaced through increases
of swimming, this is anywhere from 450 to 900 Calories. in caloric intake.
(Keep in mind that during prolonged practices, a swimmer
is unlikely to be swimming constantly, or at higher intensities,
for the entire time.)
d
Staying hungry It seems evident that swimmers have increased energy
requirements over a more sedentary population, and anecdotal evidence certainly
Combine this rate of energy expenditure with the volume
highlights increased appetites. Swimming may lead to increased energy requirements
of training that many swimmers undergo, as well as the
CH5 SP3 G2 and appetite stimulation over other forms of exercise as well, although currently there
increased metabolic demand placed on a swimmer in order
is little research evidence directly confirming this. A logical and suggested mechanism
to physiologically adapt to their training, and the energy
for this could be related to the temperature of the water in which swimmers train.
requirements of swimmers can be quite inflated. Swimmers
Exercising in cold water may lead to increases in appetite (although increases have
need to consume a huge number of Calories in food in order
not shown to be statistically significant in studies), which could be due to hunger-
to meet these energy expenditure and metabolic demands.
regulating hormonal factors. Additionally, it could simply be a response to increased
We often use the term “Calories In” to refer to the caloric intake energy expenditure because of the bodycooling effect. Regardless of the mechanism,
of a swimmer, in conjunction with the term “Calories Out” it is clear that swimmers have both an increased energy requirement, and a greater
referring to the energy expenditure and metabolic demands. appetite, following swimming.4
Energy intake
No activity
(control group) No activity (control group)
After swimming After swimming
Energy intake (kcal) 11550000 22000000 22550000
Energy intake Kcal)
126 Nutrition

--- Page 128 Text ---
a All in the balance The relative magnitudes Calorie intake and expenditure
of “Calories In” and “Calories Out” determine the
adequacy of a swimmer’s fueling in the short term,
and body mass in the longer term. Improvement in
body composition—whether involving fat loss and
muscle gain, or just fat loss and maintenance of
lean tissue—can lead to long-term performance
improvement down the road because there is less
weight to pull through the water. But weight loss
NEED TO KNOW is a slow process, and while going through it the
Calories and calories athlete will have less fuel available, so short-term
performance may suffer. For this reason, if body
A calorie (cal) is a unit of energy, defined
composition is an issue, a Calorie deficit should
specifically as the amount of energy required
be created months in advance of any major
to raise the temperature of
competition, with the swimmer then ramping
1 g of water by 1°C. Just as 1 km =
up caloric intake again leading into the competition
A
1000 m, and 1 kg = 1000 g,
to ensure optimal fueling, with the added benefit
1 kilocalorie (kcal) is equal to 1000 cal.
of being lighter.
Following the definition above, 1 kcal is the
energy required to raise the temperature of
1 kg of water by 1°C.
A When Calorie intake and expenditure are equal,
Although a calorie (cal) is 1000th of a there is a state of caloric balance, in which there is
no net weight gain or loss. However, this does not
kilocalorie (kcal) a Calorie (Cal), with a capital
mean that a swimmer cannot be losing or gaining
“C,” is the same as a kilocalorie. The two body fat, as well as losing or gaining lean tissue.
terms are used interchangeably, so 1 Cal =
B When Calorie intake falls short of expenditure,
1000 cal. Virtually all nutrition work uses
a swimmer will experience a net loss in body mass.
Cal or kcal. Even if a piece of writing does This could be a loss in body fat, or muscle, or both.
It is even possible to gain muscle or fat, while still
not capitalize cal, it is still likely to be
experiencing a net weight loss (e.g. a gain of 1 lb
referring to a Cal or kcal. muscle + a loss of 2 lb fat = net loss of 1 lb).
Inadequate Calorie intake is usually associated
Metabolic equivalent of task (MET)
with an acute decrease in performance, due to B
Metabolic equivalent of task is a way of suboptimal fueling and adaptation. This is not to
comparing the energy costs (calorie say that reduced Calorie intake cannot be a part
of long-term improvements in performance, as
requirements) of different physical activities.
ideal body composition is necessary to optimize
We take the energy equivalent expended by performance.
a person seated quietly at rest to be 1 MET.
C When “Calories In” exceed “Calories Out,”
If you’re carrying out swimmers experience a net gain in body mass.
an activity with a MET value of 3, this means Again, this can result in a gain of lean tissue,
or body fat, or both. A proportionately larger gain
you are expending 3 times as much energy
in one tissue type can also occur simultaneously
(in other words, using 3 times as many with a loss in the other tissue. This scenario is more
often associated with a short-term optimizationof
Calories) as you would when resting.
performance, as a result of adequate fueling,
but should be monitored so as to not alter body
composition in the long term.
Calories In = food and beverages
Calories Out = metabolic rate and energy expenditure C
127

--- Page 129 Text ---
0.15
0.10
0.05
0
0 5 10
Protein ingested )g)
)h rep
%(
sisehtnys
elcsuM
Can eating habits affect How much protein
muscle synthesis rate? do I need?
Protein is one of the three macronutrients, the other two being In other words, swimmers need protein to recover from their last
carbohydrate and fat. Like all macronutrients, proteins are swimming session and to become a better swimmer over time.
huge molecules made up of hundreds of sub-units, or “building An average adult swimmer of about 180 lb (82 kg), for example,
blocks,” linked together. In proteins, the building blocks are should be aiming for around 140 g of protein every day.1 That’s
called amino acids. Protein makes up the majority of muscle in equivalent to about 23 large eggs, or six small chicken breasts!
the body, which we use for swimming and other activities—an
essential nutrient that is required in abundance. Approximately 20 g of protein (1 chicken breast) per feeding
(for an average-sized athlete) seems to be the threshold mass
While a typical “healthy” daily intake for an average individual is required to stimulate a maximal rate of muscle synthesis
somewhere around 0.3–0.5 g of protein per pound of body (building and adapting muscle) for a period of time around 2–3
mass (or 0.7–1.1 g per kg), training athletes have much larger hours. This means that meals containing less than this amount
protein requirements. Most athletes (and swimmers are no of protein may not optimize the rate at which the body repairs
exception) need upward of 0.5–0.8 g of protein per pound of muscle and adapts to a training stimulus. So swimmers should
body mass per day (1.1–1.8 g per kg per day) to ensure their aim to reach 20 g of protein per feeding. Interestingly, though,
system is receiving adequate nuCtrHie5n tSs Pto1 rGep2air muscle damage meals containing more protein than this will not likely elicit a
from vigorous swimming and elicit adaptation to training stimuli. rate of muscle synthesis that is significantly stronger.2
Muscle synthesis responses to resistance training
0.15 g Body building This bar chart represents some
results from a study looking at rates of muscle protein
synthesis after resistance training.3 Immediately following
intense resistance training, subjects consumed a drink
containing 0, 5, 10, 20, or 40 g of protein. Biopsies were
0.10 then taken after 1 and 4 hours to measure muscle
synthesis. In the sample of young male athletes studied,
the rate of muscle synthesis after exercise increased in
response to increasing dietary protein. Above 20 g of
protein, the relationship between muscle synthesis rate and
quantity of protein hit a point of diminishing return – larger
0.05
amounts of ingested protein did not result in significantly
higher rates of muscle synthesis. Larger protein meals may
elicit a maximal muscle synthesis rate for a slightly longer
time, but to a limited extent only.
0
0 5 10 2200 4400
Protein ingested (g)
128 Nutrition
)h rep
%(
sisehtnys
elcsuM

--- Page 130 Text ---
CH5 SP1 G1
B
CH5 SP1 G1
A
Muscle synthesis responses to eating patterns
A B
Anabolic 10..01 Anabolic 10.0.1
00..55 00..55
a
Little and often These graphs represent muscle
synthesis responses to different eating patterns for an
00 00
average (180 lb/82 kg) swimmer.4 The gray areas
represent the anabolic response to ingested protein,
and the blue represents the eventual catabolic state -–00..55 CH5 SP1 G1 -–00..55 CH5 SP1 G1
between meals. The vertical axis shows a relative scale
of muscle synthesis, where +1 signifies a maximal
Catabolic Catabolic
anabolic response and –1 represents maximal
-–11..00 -–11.0.0 D
c
b
a
o
t
t
a
h
b
a
o
d
li
e
s
q
m
u
.
a
A
te
v
p
a
r
r
o
ie
t
t
e
y
i n
o f
i n
e
t
a
a
t
k
in
e
g
a n
p
d
a t
e
te
ff
r
e
n
c
s
t i
c
v
a
e
n
p
a
ro
c
t
c
e
o
in
m plish
6 a6
m a m
9 9a
amm
n
onooonn
3 3p
Cpmm
6 6 p
pmm
9 9 p
pmm
md indi
ngigh htt
3 3 a
a mm
6 a6
m a m
9 9a
amm
n
onooonn
3 3p
pmm
6 6 p
pmm
9 9 p
pmm
md indi
ngigh htt
3 3 a
a mm
o o
m m
timing. A single 140 g meal is not an efficient way of Three meals per day, each of 10–15 g protein Three meals per day, each of 20–30 g protein
achieving adequate muscle recovery or adaptation, as 10–15 g of protein in a given meal is a suboptimal 20–30 g of protein in a given meal is adequate to
amount to maximize an anabolic or muscle synthesis maximize the anabolic or muscle synthesis response
the muscle synthesis response will not last the whole
response. for a short time. However, only three meals may not
day, despite the meal providing a whole day’s worth of provide adequate daily protein to optimize muscle
protein. Athletes are better off utilizing a basic protein recovery and adaptation throughout the day.
timing strategy, where protein is ingested in at least
three meals per day, depending on the meal size, the C D
size of the athlete, the type and amount of trainin A g n , abolic 10..01 Anabolic 10..01
and preferred styles of fueling.
00..55 00..55
NEED TO KNOW
Anabolism encompasses the metabolic
00 00
pathways that lead to tissue growth (so
muscle anabolism is good for an athlete,
while fat anabolism is not usually desirable). -–00..55 -–00..55
Catabolism, on the other hand, refers to
the metabolic processes leading to the
Catabolic Catabolic
-–11..00 -–11..00
breakdown of tissue. 6 a6 ma m 9 9a amm n onoo onn 3 3p pmm 6 6 p pmm 9 9 p pmm md indi ngigh htt 3 3 a a mm 6 6a ma m 9 9 a amm n onoo onn 3 3 p pmm 6 6 p pmm 9 9 p p mm md indn i gighhtt 3 3 a a mm
o o
m m
Five meals per day, each of 20–30 g protein Four meals per day, each of 30–40 g protein
This frequent, pulse-like intake of 20–30 g of protein The eating pattern illustrated here also results in
results in adequate daily protein intake and meets the adequate daily protein similar to graph C. This approach
minimum threshold quantity of protein to establish involves a smaller number of larger meals to meet
a maximal anabolic or muscle-synthesis response protein requirements.
to each meal.
129
cilobanA
cilobataC
cilobanA
cilobataC
cilobanA
cilobataC
cilobanA
cilobataC

--- Page 131 Text ---
How does carbohydrate Should I get my
and fat intake affect energy from
substrate utilization? carbohydrate or fat?
Swimmers rely primarily on two sources of energy, or Internal carbohydrate stores can be maximized through a
substrates, when swimming and training. These are high-carbohydrate diet, providing around 3–5 g of carbohydrate
carbohydrate and fat. We can further subdivide these into two per pound of body mass per day (7–11 g per kg per day).
categories—endogenous (internal) and exogenous (external) A low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet may not maximize
sources. Our internal sources of carbohydrate are blood carbohydrate stores even if it is isocaloric (provides the same
glucose and glycogen, while our internal source of fat is our number of calories). In addition to adequate carbohydrate
body fat. External sources of both carbohydrate and fat come intake throughout the day, consuming carbohydrate before
from our diet. Carbohydrate utilization is typically limited by and during training has been utilized to increase carbohydrate
the quantity of carbohydrate a swimmer is capable of storing, availability, thereby delaying exhaustion and improving
while fat utilization depends the rate at which a swimmer performance in competition.
can oxidize fat for energy. CH5 SP2 G A
However, these carbohydrate-fueling strategies decrease
Assuming a caloric intake that matches energy expenditure, fat oxidation at a given intensity during a low to moderate
a swimmer needs to determine how to distribute these calories volume of training. If fat loss (rather than performance) is the
across these two macronutrients (in addition to an obligatory primary goal, then a carbohydrate-fueling strategy may be
number of calories from protein). When making this decision, counter productive. Isocaloric high-fat diets, on the other hand,
it is important that the swimmer determines whether the goal can lead to a “fat-adapted” metabolism, allowing for increased
is performance related or weight management related. In rates of fat oxidation.1
other words, are you swimming to compete or swimming
to lose weight?
Carbohydrate for performance
As the intensity of swimming increases, the swimmer’s reliance
on carbohydrate as a fuel source increases. So, at higher
intensities, carbohydrate availability (glycogen in this case) is
Low-carbohydrate,
the primary factor in determining time to exhaustion. In other
Low-carbohydrate, high-fat diet
words, at higher intensities, a fit swimmer will bhei gabhle- ftao ts wdimie t
for as long as stored carbohydrate lasts.
TURB
a
High-performance fuel For swimmers who are looking to optimize
performance at relatively high intensities (70% VHO2 imgaxh a-ncd haigrhber)o, whhicyhd is rate,
High-carbohydrate diet
the case for most swimming events, it is key to ensure adequate carbohydrate
diet
availability.2 The amount of carbohydrate we store can be optimized with a
high-carbohydrate diet of around 3–5 g/lb body mass/day. (Note that the
actual times to exhaustion may vary depending on a number of variables,
0 0.5 1.0 1.5
including fitness level.)
Time to exhaustion (min) at 70% VO2 max
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
130 Nutrition
Time to exhaustion at 70% VO (min)
2

--- Page 132 Text ---
Nutrition for high and low intensity
a
Feeding the fire This bar chart compares
substrate oxidation rates during 20 minutes of
Fat
relatively high intensity exercise (at 70% VO2 max) for
athletes who experienced acute intake of carbohydrate
before and during training (50–100 g per hour
of swimming) and for athletes who underwent no
Carbohydrate
such carbohydrate fueling. The carbohydrate-fueling
strategy appears to enhance the rate at which
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
carbohydrate is utilized, but decreases fat oxidation
Substrate oxidation (g/min)
rates.2 (Again, actual rates are dependent on
a number of variables, including fitness level.) No carbohydrate fueling before or during training
Acute carbohydrate intake before and during training
a
Slow burn This chart compares substrate
oxidation rates after six hours of exercise. Although
Fat
swimmers do not utilize fat for energy at higher
intensities very well (>70% VO2 max), they can utilize
CH5 SP2 Gf aAt for energy at lower intensities. When carbohydrate
stores become depleted due to prolonged swimming,
and swimming intensity is relatively low (<60% VO2 max),
Carbohydrate
swimmers can rely predominantly on fat as a source
of energy.1,2 At this intensity, fuel availability rarely
becomes the limiting factor, because—unlike 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
carbohydrate (glycogen) stores, which are limited— Substrate oxidation after prolonged exercise (g/min)
swimmers have an effectively unlimited supply Normal metabolism
of fat (body fat) to utilize as energy. (Again, actual Fat-adapted metabolism
rates are dependent on a number of variables,
including fitness level.)
NEED TO KNOW
Substrate—substance utilized by the body to produce energy
Low-carbohydrate,
Intensity—how hard you are swimming or training; often indicated
high-fat diet
by VO max, the volume of oxygen used by the body per minute
2
Volume—how long you are swimming or training for
TURB
High-carbohydrate,
diet
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Time to exhaustion (min) at 70% VO2 max
0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
131
Time to exhaustion at 70% VO (min)
2

--- Page 133 Text ---
e q u i p m e n t :
i r o n s u p p l e m e n t s
a n d c o o k w a r e
Iron deficiency is an ongoing concern for many swimmers occurs mostly during dryland training) causes lysis
athletes. Restrictive diets, gender-specific differences of red blood cells—in other words, some red blood cells “pop”
in requirements, hemolysis, hematuria, iron lost in from the impact, and the iron they contain is lost, as well as
sweat, and raised hepcidin levels are a few of the the cells themselves. Many female athletes should aim for a
possible factors contributing to iron deficiency. Iron dietary iron intake of more than 20 mg/day, and males should
is an essential component of hemoglobin, the oxygen- aim for an intake in excess of 10 mg/day, to compensate for
carrying pigment in red blood cells. Iron deficiency these factors. The RDA for males more than 50 years old is still
therefore leads to impaired circulation and delivery 8 mg/day but the RDA for females more than 50 years old
of oxygen to the body tissues, which is detrimental drops to 8 mg/day (assuming they are post-menopausal). So
to performance. Fortunately, swimmers’ dietary iron for female masters athletes, iron status may be less of an issue
requirements are not as elevated as those of some due to no menstrual loss, but all the other factors specific to
other types of athletes (such as endurance runners), athletes that increase requirements are still concerns.
primarily because swimming is a non-impact sport.
However, many swimmers—especially females on Athletes at risk for iron deficiency should consume iron-rich
restrictive diets such as veganism—must still foods. These can include meats, legumes, leafy greens, and
demonstrate a constant effort to maintain adequate fortified foods. Plant-sourced, or non-heme, iron is absorbed
iron levels within the body, to prevent iron deficiency. poorly compared to animal-sourced heme iron, found in meat.
This is where iron supplements and cookware come (Heme stands for hemoglobin, the iron-containing component
in. These tools can provide significant contributions of red blood cells.) This means vegetarians and vegans have
to dietary iron intake, helping at-risk swimmers meet an even harder time meeting requirements than those who
their iron requirements. consume animal products. However, even iron-rich foods often
fail to provide adequate dietary iron. For example, a 3 oz (85 g)
According to the Institute of Medicine’s Dietary Reference steak—which is a great iron source, relatively speaking—still
Intakes, the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for iron only contains 2–3 mg of iron. This means that some female
for males and females aged 14–18 years, are 11 mg/day and swimmers would need to consume more than 20 oz (570 g)
15 mg/day, respectively.1 The RDAs for males and females of red meat each day to meet dietary iron requirements. It is
aged 19–50 are 8 mg/day and 18 mg/day, respectively. often unrealistic for athletes to meet requirements solely
Athletes have elevated requirements above the RDAs due through food. Because of this, many athletes may benefit from
to mechanisms related to physical activity and impact (when adopting strategies to “chip away” at daily iron requirements in
the body contacts a surface). This may be partly due to the addition to adopting an iron-rich diet. These strategies can, and
fact that physical activity elevates hepcidin levels for a period often do, include iron supplements and cast-iron cookware.
of time, which limits absorption of iron into the circulation
following exercise. In addition, physical impact (which for
132 Nutrition

--- Page 134 Text ---
2 G _ A 3 P S _ 5 H C
Supplementation Iron cookware
NEED TO KNOW
Iron supplements—Supplemental iron,
if used, should typically be prescribed by a
physician (and would then be considered
a medication, not a supplement). Its use
Orally taken iron
should be overseen by a dietitian or physician.
supplement dissolves
Hepcidin—The hormone that controls the in stomach
body’s absorption of iron. Hepcidin levels are
elevated following exercise, which means o
Out of the frying plan Iron cookware has been
athletes will not absorb iron effectively
shown to boost dietary iron intake significantly.2
at this time. Intake of iron-rich foods, Contributions are thought to range from 7.5 mg to 14.5 mg,
supplements, and meals cooked with although to date most studies have been conducted on
iron cookware should be timed so as non-athletes, usually with a focus on iron deficiency in
not to occur until several hours developing countries. The amount of iron leached from
after training. the cookware likely depends on the amount of time food is
cooked, the number of meals that are cooked, and the
acidity of the food being cooked.
CH5_SP3A_G3
a
Pumping iron Iron supplements come in various
Iron ingots
forms, including liquids, capsules, pills, and gummies.
Some contain more bioavailable forms of iron than
others—that is, in some a higher percentage of the
iron in the supplement is actually absorbed and used
by the body. For example, ferrous iron (Fe2+) is more
CH5_SP3A_G4
bioavailable than ferric iron (Fe3+)—because the metal
ions have different charges, they react differently with
other compounds and this affects their rate of
absorption into circulation. Additionally, different iron
compounds contain different amounts of elemental iron.
For example, both ferrous fumarate and ferrous sulfate
are used as supplements, but ferrous fumarate is 33%
elemental iron, while ferrous sulfate contains just 20%
elemental iron (because the compound is
bound to some water molecules). Many
daily multi-supplements for women include o
Adding value Iron ingots can be used to contribute to
18 mg of iron, and those for men contain
athletes’ dietary iron intake. (The original ingots are in the
less. Iron medications often contain up to
shape of a fish, which is considered to be a symbol of good
100 mg of elemental iron, and are
luck and health in the rural Cambodian communities where
sometimes taken multiple times per day
they were first developed to combat anemia.) Boiling the
(e.g. 300 mg ferrous fumarate, twice
ingot in water with citrus for 10 minutes will contribute,
daily). However, these larger doses can
on average, 7 mg of dietary iron to the pot. The citrus is
sometimes lead to gastrointestinal
important to create an acidic environment, which helps
distress. Iron supplementation should be
leach the iron out of the ingot. This can be used in soups
carried out under dietary and medical
or stews—any food containing liquid that is not strained
supervision to avoid iron toxicity.
off and discarded.3
133

--- Page 135 Text ---
How do swimmers maintain How much water
adequate hydration and should I drink?
fluid balance?
Water is essential in countless mechanisms within the body. should aim to replace fluids lost in sweat through fluid
Two, which are vital to swimming performance, are thermal ingestion throughout training. The volume required is likely
regulation and the circulation of oxygen and substrate (food to be in the range of 4–16 oz (125–500 ml) per hour. Fluid
molecules) to muscles via the blood. Sweating is an important ingestion is also recommended after training, as well as
thermal regulation mechanism. Fluid loss in the form of sweat periodically throughout the day, to prevent dehydration
can reduce blood volume, cause dehydration, and negatively from occurring before the next training session.
impact performance. It has been established that training in
a dehydrated state of greater than 2% results in statistically Water as percentage of body mass
significant performance decreases. For many athletes, 2% is
as little as 2 lb (0.9 kg)—the equivalent of about two 16 oz
16–22%
(500 ml) bottles of water. In fact, it is likely that any degree
14–20%
of dehydration, even if less than 2%, has a negative impact
4.3–6.2%
on performance, albeit to a smaller extent.1 It has also been
3.5–6.0%
suggested that dehydration can have a detrimental effect on
cognitive performance.2 This could mean swimmers are less 5–20%
able to follow coaching directions in training, or demonstrate
10–30%
appropriate tactical decision making in competition.
Although thermal regulation during training may be different for 55–70%
swimmers than for other athletes, because they are immersed 50–65%
in water, fluid loss does still occur. Interestingly, in recent a study
it was found that approximately two thirds of adolescent
swimmers begin swim training in a dehydrated state.3 The
swimmers in the study maintained body mass through training
with an ad libitum hydration strategy. In other words, they drank Protein
when they felt thirsty, and ingested an equivalent amount of Mineral materials
water to the fluid they lost through sweat (as demonstrated by Fat
comparing their body mass before and after training). This Water
indicates that hydration strategies based on thirst may be enough
Males Females
to prevent further dehydration, but are not enough to rehydrate
swimmers who commence training in a dehydrated state. o
Mostly water As the single largest component of the human body,
water accounts for around 60% of the total body mass. For a healthy
A hydration strategy that involves ingesting 16–32 oz (0.5–1.0 l)
swimmer with a body mass of around 180 lb (82 kg), that makes up about
of fluid 1–2 hours prior to training may allow swimmers to 13 gallons (49 liters). The performance of prolonged exercise, like swim
commence training in a well-hydrated state. Following this, training, can result in a substantial loss of body water through sweating,
in order to prevent or limit subsequent dehydration, swimmers with the potential for adverse effects on performance capacity.
134 Nutrition

--- Page 136 Text ---
Assessing hydration status
a
The dark side One sign of dehydration is dark urine. This is because,
when the body is dehydrated, the kidneys limit the amount of water that
gets excreted as urine in an effort to keep water in the blood to maintain
blood volume. A smaller volume of darker, more concentrated urine is
therefore produced (containing larger amounts of solutes such as urea,
sodium and creatinine per unit volume). Urine color can therefore be
used as an assessment tool to determine hydration status. Although there
are other aspects that can affect urine color outside of hydration status
(such as vitamin supplementation or certain diseased states), the urine
color method of assessment has the advantages that it is simple,
CH5 SP4 G4
self administered, non-invasive, and can be used as frequently as
required throughout the day.
Refractometer
a
Precision instrument
A more precise way to measure
urine concentration is to use a 1.020
device called a refractometer.
This measures the “urine specific Hydrated Dehydrated Extremely dehydrated
gravity” (USG) of a sample. Although
the precision is much greater with
this technique, samples need to be
c
(f
o
ir
l
s
le
t
c
v
t
o
e
i
d
d
i
o
n
f
a
th
c
e
o
d
n
a
si
y
s
,
t e
fo
n
r
t
e
m
xa
a
m
nn
p
e
le
r
), Urine
sample
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
and the analysis takes longer than
Refractometer
a simple visual assessment.
measurement cell
Dehydration and performance
g
Drying out During a long sports event,
dehydration may impair performance as
much as fuel substrate depletion. When an
athlete is dehydrated by as little as 2% of
0% dehydration body mass, performance is compromised –
losses of 5% of body mass or more can cut
0% dehydration the capacity for work by about 30%.4
5% dehydration
5% dehydration
0 20 40 60 80 100
0 20 40 60 80 100
Performance (%)
Performance (%) 135

--- Page 137 Text ---
What are the important What should I eat
logistical factors influencing before training?
pre-exercise nutrient fueling?
Eating prior to training is a decision that requires the a Keep it simple Carbohydrates are digested the quickest of the three
consideration of multiple variables. One factor to think about macronutrients. This means that if minimal digestion time is available after
is whether this feeding time should be contributing to daily feeding (that is, the swimmer eats just prior to training), then carbohydrate
macronutrient goals, or if it is simply a source of caloric intake. should be the exclusive macronutrient. Depending on the intensity and volume
of training, and a number of other variables, swimmers can typically consume
In some cases, distance swimmers may find it vital to take
approximately 0.5 g of carbohydrate per pound of body mass 1 hour prior to
advantage of every feeding time possible to meet large daily
training.1 The source of this carbohydrate is often portable food items such
carbohydrate requirements (see pages 130–131). At other
as liquids, baked goods, snack items, and fruit. More than 1 hour prior to
times, swimmers may want to utilize this feeding time to
training, most athletes can tolerate larger quantities of protein-containing
add another “pulse” of protein intake to their day (see pages
foods. A typical training day for an elite, full-time swimmer would consist
128–129). However, often pre-exercise intake is simply a time
of an intense 1-hour swim practice 9–10 am, a medium-intensity 2-hour
to put food into the gut to prevent hunger and meet caloric
swim practice 3–5 pm, and after practice a 1-hour weight-training session
needs (see pages 126–127). 5:30–6:30 pm. An example of pre-training nutrition for an athlete weighing
180 lbs (82 kg) is shown here.
Another variable that must be considered is the intensity and
duration of the training which is about to commence. Longer
training sessions require more energy to maintain output, while
more intense training sessions may impair gastric emptying
rates. In addition, pre-exercise intake goals often start to blend
with the post-training intake goals from the previous session.
1-hour swim practice 9–10am
That is, intake should often be dictated more by the previous
training session than by the next one.
Breakfast (7:30 am)
The last major variable to take into account is the logistics of
2 cups of black coffee
the swimmer’s daily schedule. There is no right time to eat prior 8 oz (250 ml) of chocolate milk
to training, but there are certainly wrong types of foods to eat at a mini cheese wheel (0.7 oz, 21 g)
a bagel with butter
specific times before a training session. If a swimmer’s schedule
These foods require little preparation, allowing the
is the major factor that dictates feeding times—for example, if athlete to optimize quantity of sleep. The coffee
training occurs right after school and students are not allowed provides hydration as well as caffeine to assist
with performance in the training to follow.
to eat in class—then appropriate foods must be selected in
order for the swimmer to perform adequately. If, however, this
Calories 617
feeding time is vital for meeting specific daily macronutrient
Carbohydrate 75 g
requirements, then the time gap between intake and training
Protein 23 g
must be carefully calculated in order to provide adequate time
Fat 25 g
to digest those kinds of macronutrients.
Fluid 18 oz (about 550 ml)
Caffeine 300 mg
136 Nutrition

--- Page 138 Text ---
Daily pre-exercise fueling plan
Lunch (11:30 am) Afternoon snack (2:00 pm)
2 cups of pre-cooked pasta with 1 cup of meat sauce. A typical afternoon pre-training snack might
2 cups of spinach salad with dressing consist of a banana, 2 slices of bread or toast with
16 oz (500 ml) of water 2 tablespoons of jam, and a bottle of water.
Lunch is both post-training to the earlier session
and pre-training to the next session, so includes
Calories 374
carbohydrate and protein. Ingestion takes place
several hours before training, allowing for larger Carbohydrate 80 g
serving sizes and more protein. Protein 9 g
Fat 2 g
Calories 670
Fluid 16 oz (about 500 ml)
Carbohydrate 105 g
Protein 31 g
Fat 14 g
Fluid 16 oz (about 500 ml)
a medium-intensity 2-hour swim
practice 3–5 pm
12:00 noon
Pre-weights (5:15 pm)
A carbohydrate/protein powder in 8 oz (250 ml)
of water provides a post-practice and pre-weights
recovery drink.
Another example of both post-swim and pre-weights
ingestion, so protein is included to aid recovery
from swimming. Powders can be convenient
6:00 am 6:00 pm solutions to hit macronutrient goals for an athlete
on busy training days. Individual variations may
need to be made, as some athletes will tolerate
protein right before resistance training differently
than other athletes.
Calories 400
Carbohydrate 76 g
Protein 24 g
Fluid 8 oz (about 250 ml)
12:00 midnight
1-hour weight-training
session 5:30–6:30 pm
137

--- Page 139 Text ---
Which nutrients consumed What should I put
during training can elicit in my water bottle
performance improvement? during training?
The ingestion of certain nutrients during training can elicit a alternative energy source to carbohydrate—in this case,
boost in performance and maintain performance over a longer ingesting protein seems to have a muscle-sparing effect. At
period. During longer workouts food intake can contribute to higher intensities (at race pace or during resistance training,
energy and nutrient intake, but digestion may be an issue, for example), the energy source used is almost exclusively
depending on the food choice and individual tolerance. Due carbohydrate, and co-ingestion of protein seems to have little
to the logistics of a swim practice, the most likely vehicle for direct effect on performance. However, since in the right
nutrient ingestion during this time is the swimmer’s water bottle, quantities it does not cause gastrointestinal discomfort, and
which is always on hand since preventing dehydration is a key is therefore not detrimental to performance, protein ingestion
focus in training (see pages 134–135). A normal rate of gastric can be used even during higher-intensity training in order to
emptying and intestinal absorption (the rate at which the fluid contribute to daily protein needs (see pages 134–135).
leaves the stomach and is then absorbed into the blood
stream) means that swimmers can consume up to 32 oz (about
1 liter) of water per hour without gastrointestinal discomfort.1
This is ideal in maintaining performance. If exercising in a hot
environment (for example, outdoors in a warm climate), a pinch
of salt dissolved in the drinking water may be useful in
maintaining electrolyte balance (see pages 150–151).
Another focus during swim training should be preventing a Perfect solution It appears that when
glycogen depletion. This can be achieved through the simple carbohydrate molecules (sugars)
ingestion of carbohydrate. However, the rate of gastric are utilized, solution concentrations of 32 oz (1 L) water
emptying is reduced for carbohydrate solutions of approximately 6% are ideal for optimizing
approximately 8% concentration and greater.2 This varies carbohydrate ingestion without causing
gastrointestinal discomfort. This works out to
depending on the type of carbohydrate and the other
60 g of carbohydrate in a 32 oz (1 liter) water
substances in the solution (for example, electrolytes, amino
bottle, which can be consumed every hour.
acids, and so on), but generally means that a smaller volume
For trials where subjects consume protein
per hour can be ingested comfortably than for water alone,
with carbohydrate during training, 0.09–
or for lower carbohydrate concentrations.
0.11 g protein per lb of body mass is typically
used (0.20–0.25 g per kg), which works out
Protein ingestion can also be considered. When adequate fluid to approximately 10–20 g protein per 32 oz
(for example, 32 oz, or 1 liter) is co-ingested with protein, with (1 liter) of water for most swimmers
or without carbohydrate, benefits in net protein balance have (a 1% protein solution).
been shown, without gastrointestinal discomfort.3 These
benefits seem only to occur during long, low-intensity training,
when the metabolism of muscle tissue may occur as an 60 g carbohydrate
10 g protein
138 Nutrition

--- Page 140 Text ---
a
Topping up Optimizing the quantity
of carbohydrate intake during training limits
glycogen usage while allowing the swimmer
to maintain the intensity of training, thus
reducing fatigue. This is especially important
for training sessions that last longer than
1 hour. (For training sessions of less
than 1 hour, glycogen depletion is generally
not a concern and exogenous carbohydrate
intake is less beneficial.) Note that the
starting glycogen concentration and the
rate of depletion may vary based on a
number of other factors.
139
)ssam
tew
gk/lomm(
noitartnecnoc
negocylG
Carbohydrate ingestion during training
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Duration of training (min)
No carbohydrate ingestion
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Duration of training (min)
)ssam
tew
gk/lomm(
noitartnecnoc
negocylG
0 30 60 90 120
0 30 60 90 120

--- Page 141 Text ---
What should a swimmer ingest What should I eat
for optimal neuromuscular after training?
and metabolic adaptation?
Swimming taxes the body in a number of ways. Fluids and but can also include some plant-based proteins such as soy.
electrolytes (see pages 150–151) are lost, multiple systems High-quality protein has a favorable amino acid profile, which
throughout the body become fatigued, force is exerted on allows it to be better incorporated into skeletal muscle.
joints—but primarily, swimming stresses local muscular Remember that this post-training protein intake to promote
systems being used to propel the body through the water, as recovery also contributes to the overall daily protein intake as
well as utilizing large amounts of energy. Both of these impacts well (see pages 128–129).
should be addressed in a post-training nutrition routine.
As a result of the utilization of large amounts of energy during
One of the major effects of muscular stress during a training prolonged swim training, glycogen stores are often depleted.
session is the breakdown of skeletal muscle. It is important Placing a focus on adequately replenishing glycogen through
that a swimmer “rebuilds” this muscle in order to adapt to appropriate carbohydrate intake will lead to better energy
this type of training and have performance improvements. availability in the next training session. If glycogen depletion
Consuming 0.1–0.2 g of a high-quality protein per pound of from training has occurred, consuming a total of 4–5 g of
body mass (about 0.2–0.4 g/kg) within the first 2 hours carbohydrate per pound of body mass (around 9–11 g/kg),
following training provides optimal muscle recovery.1 High- spread across multiple points over the next 24 hours will
quality protein sources are typically animal based (for example, provide the most effective replenishment of glycogen.2
milk proteins, egg proteins, chicken, beef, fish, and so on),
CH5_SP7_G1_ARM
Muscle adaptation
Hypertrophy occurs when
the rate of muscle synthesis
is greater than the rate of
muscle breakdown.
o
Making muscle Muscles are predominantly composed
Amino acids Blood vessel
of protein, and protein is made up of amino acids. During
muscle synthesis, amino acids are incorporated into muscle.
Amino acids
During muscle breakdown, amino acids are released from
muscle. Hypertrophy (building muscle) occurs when the
amount of muscle synthesis occurring is greater than the Muscle Muscle
amount of muscle breakdown. During this “rebuilding,” synthesis breakdown
skeletal muscle is adapting to the physical stress of training,
Muscle
to better tolerate similar physical stress in the future. protein
140 Nutrition

--- Page 142 Text ---
a
Replenish for recovery Following training,
replenishing glycogen is one of the most important
tasks to accomplish prior to the next training
session. The bar chart shows the results of a 106
study in which two groups of athletes undertook
100
an exercise trial to deplete muscle glycogen, and
were then tested for muscle glycogen after 24
hours. For both groups, the total carbohydrate
intake over the 24-hour recovery period was
4.5 g per pound of body mass (10 g/kg) over four
meals, but one group consumed foods with a high
glycemic index (such as sport drinks, juice, white
bread, and white rice), while the other were given
low glycemic carbohydrates (including whole
grain, oats, brown rice, and vegetables). The
increase in muscle glycogen content after 24
hours of recovery was greater for the group with
71.5
the high glycemic index diet than for those with
the low glycemic index diet. These results suggest
that high glycemic carbohydrates do a better job
of replenishing lost glycogen stores following
training than low glycemic carbohydrates.3
50
Low glycemic index foods
High glycemic index foods
egarots
negocylg
elcsum
ni
esaercni
egarevA
)ssam
tew
gk/lomm(
esicrexe
retfa
sruoh
42

--- Page 143 Text ---
What is the ergogenic Will caffeine make
effect of caffeine on me swim faster?
swimming performance?
Caffeine is widely used, both within and outside of the that low-habitual consumption may lead to a tolerance and
swimming population, and its intake as a potential ergogenic blunt the ergogenic effects of acute intake,3 while other studies
(performance-enhancing) aid is ethically and socially suggest high-habitual consumption has no effect on the
acceptable. It can be consumed in energy drinks, or in the ergogenic effects of acute intake.4 Futhermore, reports of
form of pills and pre-workout powders—but, while research restlessness following caffeine intake in those who are typically
suggests that these anhydrous (dry) forms may in fact be non-users are common,1 which also indicates that the added
slightly more effective than coffee, the traditional brew probably stimulus from caffeine consumption must be utilized efficiently,
remains the most common means of caffeine consumption. through regular exposure and training in the specific task, for it
to lead to performance improvements. Those with chronic
Research on the potential ergogenic benefits of caffeine is consumption may benefit from cutting down on daily
extensive, and suggests that the substance enhances consumption and utilizing caffeine for key performances only.
performance in a number of ways. One of the mechanisms
most strongly supported by research evidence is stimulation
of the central nervous system. Caffeine is very easily absorbed
from the gut, and circulates throughout the body in the blood a Competing molecules The main ergogenic effect of caffeine on the central
system. It crosses the blood–brain barrier with ease, where it nervous system is due to its molecular structure. A caffeine molecule closely
stimulates the central nervous system and delays the onset resembles a molecule of adenosine, which is a neuromodulator substance that has
of fatigue.1 In addition, caffeine may improve substrate utilization a sedative effect when it activates specific receptors on the surfaces of neurons
(nerve cells) in the brain. Because caffeine has a very similar shape, it can act as an
through increased fat oxidation, resulting in a glycogen “sparing”
adenosine receptor antagonist within the brain. In other words, caffeine molecules
effect, which is beneficial as glycogen availability is typically the
can occupy the adenosine receptor sites, stopping adenosine molecules from
limiting factor in high-intensity swimming performance. Other
reaching them. Because caffeine itself does not activate the receptors, it prevents
potential mechanisms include improved neuromuscular function,
the fatiguing effects of adenosine activation from occurring.
increased levels of beta-endorphins, increased thermogenesis
(heat production), and a placebo effect.
Although caffeine is generally well established as an ergogenic
aid, research suggests that specific swim training is necessary
to harness its ergogenic benefits. A study compared the
performance response of trained and occasional (untrained)
swimmers to caffeine intake. Each group, trained and
untrained, swam two 100 m maximal freestyle efforts separated
by 20 minutes—one after 250 mg of caffeine intake, and the N = Nitrogen atom
other after 250 mg of a placebo. Only the trained swimmers O = Oxygen atom
showed a significant improvement in their swimming speed C = Carbon atom
following caffeine intake, suggesting that caffeine may help H = Hydrogen ion
only advanced swimmers go faster.2 Some literature suggests Adenosine C10H13N5O4
142 Nutrition

--- Page 144 Text ---
CH5_SP8_LANREF_NEW_G1’s
CH5_SP8_G3_REV
Time after caffeine ingestion (min)
CH5_SP8_G2_LIGHT
Adenosine
Caffeine
Adenosine
receptors
enieffac
fo
noitartnecnoc
doolB
)retilillim
rep
smargorcim(
CH5_SP8_LANREF_NEW_G1’s
CH5_SP8_GI_CAFF_NEW
CH5_SP8_GI_ADEN_NEW
Caffeine C8H10N4O2
Adenosine C10H13N5O4
CH5_SP8_G3_REV
8
7
6
5
4
3
N O C H 2
CH5_SP8_GI_KEY 1
0
0 30 60 90 120 150 180
Time after caffeine ingestion (min)
CH5_SP8_G2_LIGHT
Adenosine
Caffeine
Adenosine
receptors
enieffac
fo
noitartnecnoc
doolB
)retilillim
rep
smargorcim(
CH5_SP8_GI_CAFF_NEW
CH5_SP8_GI_ADEN_NEW
Caffeine C8H10N4O2
Peak caffeine levels
Adenosine C10H13N5O4
a
Caffeine boost Following a dose of approximately
8
2.7 mg per pound of body mass (6 mg/kg), caffeine levels
in the blood rise rapidly in the 30 minutes following 7
ingestion, reaching peak levels within 90 minutes and 6
remaining high for more than 3 hours.5 In fact, caffeine
5 doses of around 1.3 mg/lb body mass (3 mg/kg) are more
typical, and have been shown to be effective in enhancing 4
performance. This works out to be about 150–300 mg of
3
caffeine for most swimmers, which can be usually attained
from 1–2 cups of coffee. The benefits to performance may N O C H 2
last up to 6 hours following ingestion.6 CH5_SP8_GI_KEY 1
0
0 30 60 90 120 150 180
Caffeine and the nervous system
Blood concentration of caffeine (micrograms per milliliter)
Adenosine
Caffeine
Receptor on
brain cell
surface
Caffeine C8H10N4O2
143
)nim(
noitsegni
enieffac
retfa
emiT
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0 30 60 90 120 150 180
NEED TO KNOW
The US Department of Health and
Human Services and US Department
of Agriculture’s latest dietary advice
is to ingest no more than 400 mg of
caffeine per day—approximately
three mugs of coffee.

--- Page 145 Text ---
Can creatine supplementation Will taking
extend the duration of the creatine improve
phosphagen system? my swimming?
Creatine is a popular supplement with potential performance-
NEED TO KNOW
enhancing properties, which has been deemed ethical by
NSF International and Informed Choice are two organizations that test
most sporting organizations and anti-doping agencies,
supplements for banned substances. If athletes do choose to
including the World Anti Doping Agency (WADA). Although
supplement, they should use products certified by such organizations.
creatine is most popular in power sports such as weightlifting
and football, its use has potential benefits across a wide
Note: supplementation guidelines are for adult swimmers.
spectrum of sports, including swimming. To understand the
extent to which creatine supplementation may, or may
not, improve performance, a basic understanding of
bioenergetics is necessary.
In the human body, the most basic form of energy currency is CP is naturally stored within the body even with no
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a compound that contains three supplementary intake. Many animal products such as red
phosphates. When a phosphate is cleaved from ATP, adenosine meats contain small quantities of creatine—through dietary
diphosphate (ADP) is formed, and energy is released. This intake, muscular levels of creatine can be raised, allowing
energy is used in cells for all kinds of life processes, including for additional phosphates to be stored, and prolonging
the muscle movement involved in swimming. The energy the maintenance of maximal exercise intensity. However,
system at play here is called the phosphagen system—it ergogenic doses typically come from supplementation using
supplies the energy necessary for immediate performance, creatine monohydrate, rather than from food. Supplementation
but has a short duration before ATP is depleted. At this point, may lead to performance improvements in high intensity
the body must “reload” ADP to make more ATP. swimming of approximately 5–30 seconds.1 This can translate
to performance improvement in competition, as well as in swim
The most immediate way of re-forming ATP from ADP is using and dryland training, which may lead to enhanced adaptation.
creatine phosphate (CP). CP acts as a reservoir of phosphates,
which are each bound to a creatine molecule. When ATP is
low and ADP concentrations are increasing, CP donates its
a
Reaching saturation Two standard creatine supplementation protocols exist.
phosphate to ADP to re-form ATP—this can then be broken
Both are evidence based and are effective in raising creatine content in the muscle by
down once again into ADP, with the release of energy for
approximately 20%, from approximately 60 mmol per pound of dry mass of muscle
processes including locomotion. CP’s contribution occurs
(132 mmol/kg), to approximately 72 mmol/lb dry mass of muscle (160 mmol/kg), in
at a rapid rate, sustaining maximal output (unlike other types
which muscular creatine content would be considered fully “saturated.” The first takes
of anaerobic energy production such as glycolysis, or aerobic
a gradual approach, using a dose of 3–5 g/day, which causes concentrations of
production in the mitochondria, in which output intensity
muscular creatine to rise gently over about four weeks until they reach “saturated”
decreases). However, CP quickly becomes depleted, in
levels. The second protocol involves much higher loading doses of 5 g taken four
a matter of seconds. times per day. Under this program, creatine content within the muscle reaches
“saturated” levels within about five days. A maintenance dose of 3–5 g/day
sustains “saturated” levels.1
144 Nutrition

--- Page 146 Text ---
a Energy reloading ATP is resynthesized,
Sinking feeling We can think of ATP as being
allowing maximal power
like a loaded spring, storing energy. When it releases to be sustained. (This
that energy as it loses a phosphate, it becomes ADP, CP donates kicks in around 10 s
phosphate to after intense exercise
which is like an unloaded spring. ADP needs to be Creatine kinase (enzyme)
ADP during high begins, when ATP stores
“reloaded” by adding a phosphate to resynthesize ATP, intensity exercise. are depleted.)
before it can release its energy once again. Creatine
helps to “reload” the spring. This whole process is Adenosine P P Adenosine P P P
made possible by the enzyme creatine kinase, which
catalyzes the “reloading” of ADP to ATP, when CP ADP ATP
donates its phosphate. Additionally, creatine kinase
catalyzes the reverse reaction, which occurs at rest,
and is necessary to re-form CP from creatine and
Creatine P Creatine H
phosphate for the future. This is accomplished when
ATP donates a phosphate to an “empty” creatine Creatine phosphate (CP) Creatine
molecule. Simultaneously, ATP molecules used to Taking a creatine
As an additional monohydrate
reload CP are themselves replenished through other
benefit, H+ ions H+ supplement (creatine
energy systems when given adequate time. Note that resulting from anaerobic with a water molecule)
creatine monohydrate supplementation only seems exercise bind to creatine can increase muscular
in place of phosphate, so creatine levels by
to be beneficial in 80% of athletes—20% are Creatine kinase (enzyme)
CP also acts as a buffer around 20%.
considered “non-responders.” Supplementation can
against metabolic acidity
lead to water weight gain, which is expected and safe. (see pages 146–147).
Creatine levels in the body
Creatine
supplementation can
raise normal muscular
Creatine levels without creatine by around
supplementation 20%, to “saturation,”
beyond which levels
cannot be increased
any further.
145

--- Page 147 Text ---
Which substances What supplements
buffer against can I take to maintain
metabolic acidity? swim speed?
During exercise, hydrogen ions are produced as a by-product joined together—in carnosine, the other amino acid is histidine.)
of the complex mechanisms that release energy. However, Once formed, carnosine accumulates inside muscle cells and
hydrogen ions are an inherent component of acids, which can serves as a buffer for hydrogen ions. Ergogenic (performance-
be debilitating to performance. By creating metabolic acidity, enhancing) doses of beta-alanine are typically 1.6 g four times
hydrogen ions can impair muscular contractions and damage per day, and concentrations are required to “build up” over the
enzymes important for energy production. At lower intensities, course of several weeks in order to reach effective levels.1
our body can remove the ions being produced before they Some athletes experience a “flushing” or skin-tingling effect—
accumulate to a point of inhibiting performance. However, as this is not dangerous, but some find it uncomfortable.
intensity of exercise increases, hydrogen ion levels rise because
the body is not able to remove them from muscle and blood Bicarbonate, usually in the form of sodium bicarbonate (baking
at the same rate they are being produced. This is what causes soda), acts by a similar hydrogen-buffering mechanism. During
the burning feeling during intense swimming, which is often intense swimming, hydrogen ions create an acidic environment
mistakenly attributed to lactic acid. (In fact, lactic acid almost both inside cells and in the fluid surrounding them—it is in this
immediately dissociates into lactate ions and hydrogen ions in extracellular space that bicarbonate acts. Ergogenic doses are
muscle tissue.) Substances that act as hydrogen ion buffers typically 130 mg per pound of body mass (about 290 mg/kg),
can limit the accumulation of hydrogen ions in the body and dissolved in 32 oz of water (about 1 liter), taken 1–2 hours prior
delay the onset of fatigue due to metabolic acidity. to performance.2 Gastrointestinal discomfort can be common,
and may inhibit performance more than the metabolic acidity
Beta-alanine is an amino acid that forms part of the dipeptide the supplement is intended to counter, so its benefit is perhaps
carnosine. (A dipeptide is a molecule made of two amino acids questionable. However, both sodium bicarbonate and beta-
alanine supplementation for performance enhancement have
Formation of carnosine been deemed ethical by most sporting organizations and
anti-doping agencies, including the World Anti Doping
Histidine C6H9N3O2 (amino acid) This part of the molecule “mops
Agency (WADA).
up” hydrogen ions—an H+ ion
joins the N to form NH+. In this
way, carnosine acts as a buffer.
+ H20
Beta-alanine C3H7NO2 (amino acid)
Carnosine synthase N = Nitrogen atom
(enzyme) O = Oxygen atom
C = Carbon atom
H = Hydrogen ion
Carnosine C9H14N4O3 (dipeptide)
146 Nutrition

--- Page 148 Text ---
a Bicarbonate buffering system
Taking acid out of the equation Shortly after sodium
bicarbonate enters the body, it dissociates into sodium ions and
bicarbonate ions. Each bicarbonate ion then bonds with a CO2
H2O
hydrogen ion to create carbonic acid, which in turn dissociates
exhaled
into carbon dioxide and water. Carbon dioxide and water are both
from lungs
eliminated during expiration from the lungs, while further excess
carbon
water
water is removed by the kidneys. This is part of the naturally dioxide
occurring bicarbonate buffering system that regulates acidity
dissociates
in the blood for a number of reasons outside of exercise.
However, the addition of bicarbonate ions via ingestion of
sodium bicarbonate allows for additional buffering of hydrogen
H2CO3
ions during exercise that otherwise would not occur.
Hydrogen ions and performance
carbonic acid
H+
hydrogen ions,
from
exercise
Na+
Exercise time or intensity H+ ions Performance HCO3 – sodium ions
bicarbonate ions
o used in the
Acid erosion The increases in intracellular and extracellular
body or
hydrogen ion levels that build up during intense exercise will inevitably eliminated by
erode performance, unless supplements are taken in order to help kidneys or
by sweating
buffer the effects.
g
Buffer zone The amino acids beta-alanine and histidine combine dissociates
to form a dipeptide called carnosine—the reaction is catalyzed by the
enzyme carnosine synthase. (An enzyme controls a reaction, but does not
take part and remains unchanged chemically.) Histidine is abundant, but
NaHCO3
beta-alanine is usually in short supply in the body, which means it normally
limits the rate of the reaction—adding more beta-alanine in the form of a
supplement therefore increases the rate at which carnosine is formed.
The “ring” part of the carnosine molecule is where hydrogen ions are
“bound up” and removed from intracellular space—an H+ ion bonds
with a nitrogen atom, N, forming an NH+ group. Once muscular carnosine
Sodium bicarbonate
levels accumulate to a certain level, they can have a significant effect on
supplement
hydrogen ion concentrations.
147

--- Page 149 Text ---
e l i t e - l e v e l n u t r i t i o n
SCIENCE
IN ACTION
Typical weekly training for an elite, full-time, 180 lb (82 kg) swimmer
could consist of 18 hours in the water, with another 4 hours of dryland
training. Today, training is an intense, 1-hour swim practice 9–10 am,
a medium-intensity 2-hour swim 3–5 pm, and an hour of weight training
5:30–6:30 pm.
Breakfast consists of black coffee, chocolate milk, a mini cheese wheel, and a bagel
with butter—these foods require little preparation, allowing the athlete to optimize
sleep. The coffee provides hydration as well as caffeine to assist performance.
During morning practice, our swimmer ingests water, and afterward has a strawberry
and skim milk smoothie—a fluid snack provides less satiety to negatively impact
intake at lunch time. Lunch consists of pre-cooked leftover pasta with meat sauce,
and spinach salad with dressing—cooking in bulk in advance decreases food
preparation time on busy training days like this. As a small afternoon snack, to
optimize fuel availability leading into the longer training session, and to add another
pulse of protein to the day, our swimmer has black coffee, vanilla Greek yogurt,
and two slices of toast with jam.
Afternoon practice fueling consists of carbohydrate powder in water consumed
during practice. Carbohydrate solutions of 6% have optimal gastric emptying rates,
and will not upset the athlete’s stomach. A protein and carbohydrate powder in water
provides a post-practice, pre-weights recovery drink. Powders can be convenient
solutions to hit macronutrient goals for an athlete on busy training days. During weight
training, our swimmer takes in water, and afterward recovers with a pre-packed
peanut butter and jam sandwich, two granola bars, and more water. Waiting to get
a
home after training can interfere with meal timing—this way, the athlete can fit in two Fuel for performance Proper
nutrition is important for everyone—
feedings (this one and dinner) before the end of the day. Dinner is a chicken breast
swimmers are no exception.
with BBQ sauce, rice, steamed broccoli, and melted cheese. Consuming a larger
A balanced diet of carbohydrate,
meal before bed aids in overnight recovery and adaptation to training.
protein, fat, fluid, vitamins,
minerals, electrolytes, and possibly
In total, on this training day, our elite swimmer has consumed 4125 Calories,
supplements, as well as an effective
644 g of carbohydrate, 196 g of protein, 85 g of fat, 148 oz (4.5 liters) of fluids,
strategy for appropriately timed
and 600 mg of caffeine.
nutrient delivery, are essential for
optimizing performance, body
composition, and training
adaptation.
148 Nutrition

--- Page 151 Text ---
What are electrolytes How much salt
and how do they should I consume?
affect performance?
Electrolytes are substances whose particles have an electrical holds true for swimmers too. Swimmers may not sweat as
charge, or the potential for a charge. In physiology, the primary much as some other athletes (such as outdoor endurance
electrolytes of concern are sodium, potassium, calcium, athletes), but mild dehydration is still possible and can
magnesium, chloride, phosphate, and bicarbonate. These negatively impact performance.
electrolytes play a range of roles within the body, many of
which are performance related, such as action potential, It is important for swimmers to consume adequate quantities
and some of which are discussed elsewhere in this chapter. of sodium in their diet in order to replace sodium lost in
However, when it comes to performance-related dietary sweat, and aid in fluid retention necessary for training and
concerns, sodium should be the electrolyte to focus on. competition. According to the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey 2009–2012 (NHANES), an average
Sodium plays a role in water balance, causing retention of fluid. adult American’s sodium intake is 4 g per day. This
For some, this can lead to hypervolemia (an excessive volume consumption is well above the Dietary Guidelines for
of blood), which can cause extra pressure on blood vessels and Americans’ recommendation of less than 2.3 g of sodium
subsequent hypertension, but is typically not a concern for an per day. However, for swimmers, such a large dietary intake
active population such as swimmers. In fact, for many athletes, is usually about right to replace sodium lost in sweat while
increased sodium intake helps retain additional fluids leading swimming, and provide adequate fluid retention necessary
into training, which can help maintain adequate blood volume for performance. Following recommendations to decrease
while sweating—a necessity for optimal performance. This daily sodium intake may not be advisable for swimmers.
Dietary sodium intake
a
Salty solution It is important to replace
sodium lost in sweat through dietary sodium intake.
NaCl
Fortunately, salt contains large quantities of sodium,
Sodium chloride, or salt
and is therefore an easy way to replenish sodium
Cl −
levels. Salt is used to season and preserve many Na+
Chloride
foods, and is likely to be present in adequate amounts Sodium
in a regular diet, without adding extra to meals.
Electrolyte sports drinks contain some salt, and are
beneficial for athletes who sweat at high rates, such
23 g/mol Table Salt
as outdoor endurance runners, for example—they 35.5 g/mol 58.5 g/mol
need the sodium at that moment in time and can’t
These numbers give the Table salt is comprised 1 mole of salt is about
wait. Swimmers, however, don’t usually sweat enough
molar mass of each of sodium and chloride, 60 g, or 10 teaspoons.
to require sodium replenishment so urgently.
substance—that is, the mass with approximately 39% 1 teaspoon of salt
Packaged food must be labeled to show its sodium of one mole of the substance. of the mass coming (approximately 6 g),
content, which helps athletes track consumption. (A mole is a very large, fixed from sodium. contains 2.3 g of sodium.
number of particles.)
If a food—such as fresh fruit—is not labeled, it is
likely to have a low sodium content.
150 Nutrition

--- Page 152 Text ---
Rates of sweat loss
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
After 1 hour of swimming After 2 hours of swimming After 3 hours of swimming After 4 hours of swimming
o
Sweating it out In a study of well-trained swimmers, sodium concentration in
sweat averaged approximately 30 mg/oz (about 1.1 mg/g), and average hourly sweat
rate was approximately 10 oz/h (about 280 g/h).1 This works out to around 300 mg of
sodium lost in every hour of swimming. Each hour requires increasing dietary intake by
13% over the recommended dietary guidelines. Multiple hours of training will result in
further sodium loss. All sodium lost should be replaced through dietary intake.
151
)yad/g(
muidos
fo
ekatni
yliad
dednemmoceR

--- Page 153 Text ---
All sports, especially at the competitive level, place stress on the body.
Swimming is not an exception as an arduous volume of training and repetition
is necessary for peak performance, which also places stress on specific
areas of the body. As stress accumulates it can cause a structure to fail and
an injury to result. Therefore, understanding these stressors, what factors
influence them and how to reduce them becomes essential for anyone
involved in swimming training. Nevertheless, some injuries may still occur,
so knowing the steps involved in dealing with an injury early in the process
is key for minimizing the impact and time away from the pool.

--- Page 154 Text ---
c h a p t e r s i x
i n j u r y p r e v e n t i o n
a n d r e h a b i l i t a t i o n
G. John Mullen

--- Page 155 Text ---
What is the physiological How can I tell
process during an injury? if I am injured?
Differentiating injury from soreness, and understanding its that help induce muscle regeneration. In overuse injuries such
severity, is tough in swimming. Unlike athletes in some other as are common in swimming, however, long-term infiltration
sports, many swimmers undergo overuse injuries, resulting of macrophages can result in scarring called fibrosis, leading
from accumulation of stress overload. The tissue fails, triggering to weakened muscle tissue.
inflammation, the first phase of the injury process. Inflammation,
which is a sure sign of injury, occurs within seconds but can The second phase of injury recovery is called proliferation,
linger for months in severe or poorly managed cases. and involves the growth of new tissue. Proliferation begins as
inflammation resolves, and the body starts to repair itself.
The classic signs and symptoms of inflammation are swelling, Specialized cells form new tissues, and the body produces the
redness, radiating heat, pain, and sometimes loss of function. protein collagen to repair damaged structures, though at this
Redness and heat are caused by increased blood flow to the stage the collagen is laid down in a disorganized, inefficient
site, as blood vessels dilate locally. The blood vessels also fashion. It’s important to remember that during this phase the
become more permeable, so plasma fluid leaks into the body is repairing, but not fully repaired and the swimmer should
damaged tissue, causing swelling. White blood cells called take care to prevent a setback.
neutrophils move in during the first 6–24 hours, and are
replaced by other white blood cells, called monocytes, within The final stage of recovery, known as maturation or remodeling,
24–48 hours. By a process called phagocytosis, monocytes can last from two to four months, or longer. Collagen fibers are
engulf and destroy damaged and dead cells in the tissue, now laid down in an optimal, orderly fashion, and full strength
along with pathogens and other debris. After about two days, and function begins to return. However, the body is still more
monocytes mature into macrophages, which secrete chemicals susceptible than normal to re-injury.
esnopseR
Stages of recovery
g
Taking time The body’s recovery responses
Phase 1: Inflammation Phase 2: Proliferation Phase 3: Remodeling
following an injury occur in three distinct, though
• clearance of debris and • collagen synthesis • collagen remodeling
pathogens • new tissue synthesis continuous, phases. In total, it can take months or even
years to regain full strength and function, during which
time the body is at higher than normal risk of renewed
tissue damage. Many swimmers rush back to the pool
after an injury, but this lack of patience greatly
increases the risk of re-injury and a setback.
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Collagen
Hours Days Weeks Months/years
Time after injury
154 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 156 Text ---
Injury and recovery processes
Permanent tissue
Tissue remodeling
remodeling
Reversible tissue
Reduced strength
remodeling from injury
Pain, loss of function,
Forceful or repetitive Acute (short-term)
Tissue injury poor physical and
tasks (stress overload) inflammation
mental health
Fibrosis (muscle
Note scarring)
that tissue remodeling
and neural rewiring
Chronic (long-term)
can be positive
inflammation
outcomes of safe
training, necessary
to learn new motor
skills and build Neural “rewiring”
performance. e.g. learning new Altered sensation and
motor abilities
motor patterns
Causal link Potentially increased likelihood
o
More than just sore Injuries cause multifactorial problems in swimmers, apart
from the obvious cellular distress. Following painful tissue damage, the body often
reacts by altering patterns of movement in an attempt to minimize the agony. Such
alterations can greatly impair performance, as well as rehabilitation. For example,
imagine a swimmer battling with pain for a year—it could take many further years
to override the neural “rewiring” resulting from altered motor patterns, and return to
the desired technique. The psychological impact of an injury is also immense, and
building mental strength for injury rehabilitation is necessary for returning to elite
performance. Even after a low-grade injury such as a simple microtrauma of muscle
fibers, gradual return to training volume and intensity, combined with progressive
overload, is necessary for reducing pain and injury in swimmers.
155

--- Page 157 Text ---
What are the stressors Why do my
that cause shoulder shoulders hurt
pain during swimming? when I swim?
Every sport places specific stresses on bodily structures. In the occurrence of scapular dyskinesis (abnormal motion of the
swimming, the shoulders endure high stresses from the sheer scapula during shoulder movement) increased from 37% of
number of overhead shoulder revolutions. Humans didn’t swimmers at one quarter of the way through a practice, to
evolve to perform a million overhead revolutions each year. 68% at the midway point, to 73% at three-quarters of the way
through. By the end of the training session, 82% of swimmers
In recent studies, 85% of high-school-aged club swimmers demonstrated scapular dyskinesis, which indicates poor
reported mild shoulder pain during a twelve-month period, endurance strength of the scapular stabilizing muscles.4 If
61% reported moderate shoulder pain, and 21% reported tissue mobility is limited, this can also increase shoulder stress.
severe shoulder pain. Of these, only 14% had been to a For example, a tight pectoralis muscle limits scapular upward
physician.1 Also, 73% of these swimmers reported using pain rotation, external rotation, and posterior tilt,5 thereby reducing
medication one or more times per week. The rate of pain the subacromial space (see pages 66–67).
isn’t isolated to youth swimmers—another study found that
66% of US swimmers competing at the 2008 Olympic d
Shoulders back This shows the anatomy of a normal shoulder, from the front.
Games had a history of shoulder pain.2
(Note that the clavicle ligaments are not shown here, and neither are the ribs.) Some
people have a higher risk for injury due to their anatomy. For example, in some cases,
The continual volume of swimming over a long period is the people are born with a larger or hooked acromion, which puts them at risk for shoulder
logical reason for shoulder pain. Many healthcare professionals injuries. Such innate anatomical discrepancies can only be fixed by surgical means.
suggest that high-volume training leads to overuse injuries.
One study found that 44% of injuries among a women’s Shoulder anatomy
collegiate swim team were due to swimming itself, rather than
Bursa Coracoacromial ligament
other training, and these were mainly in the shoulders and flat membrane sac that connective tissue joining the
upper body.3 Training intensity is also a factor, as higher separates parts of shoulder acromion and the coracoid
process
intensity results in greater load. Finding a balance of training Clavicle
collar bone
volume and intensity for each individual helps maintain a Acromion
top back part of scapula
margin of safety for tissue tolerance.
Subacromial “space”
Swimming technique plays a vital role in shoulder pain—poor
technique increases shoulder stress and tissues may overload Coracoid process Supraspinatus
front part of scapula tendon and muscle forming
(see pages 66–67). Ideal technique varies for each swimmer and
part of the rotator cuff
intensity of training. Creating an individual plan reduces the load. Scapula
shoulder blade
Humerus
Lastly, the swimmer’s physical characteristics play an important upper arm bone
part. Of these, some—such as muscular strength and tissue
Long biceps tendon
mobility—are modifiable, while others are not. If a swimmer connective tissue
lacks the physical strength to tolerate a practice, the stroke attaching the biceps
muscle to the scapula
will deteriorate and this increases tissue load. In one study,
156 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 1 ---
Subacromial “space”

iN Supraspinatus

tendon and muscle forming
part of the rotator cuff

Humerus
upper arm bone

Long biceps tendon
connective tissue
attaching the biceps
muscle to the scapula

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 2 ---
Coracoid process “f
front part of scapula

Scapula
shoulder blade

Long biceps t

connective ti
attaching the |
muscle to the s

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 3 ---
oid process fo
tof scapula

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 4 ---
AUVIN MIVUGOD = A
part of scapula

scapula
ulder blade

Long biceps te
connective tis:
attaching the bi

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 5 ---
coid process

yart of scapula f

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 6 ---
oracoid process f
nt part of scapula.

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 7 ---
Coracoid process
front part of scapula’.

Scapula
shoulder blade

Long bic

connec
attachin¢
muscle to

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 8 ---
cess

<a
‘
y
c
H
‘

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 9 ---
tendon and muscle fo!
part of the rotator cuff

Humerus
upper arm bon

tendon
tissue
biceps
scapula

--- OCR from Page 157 Image 10 ---
Deotietelensinceinatiainstiiaiatiaetalied niet

(NX Supraspinatus

tendon and muscle forming
part of the rotator cuff

Humerus
upper arm bone

tendon
issue
biceps
scapula

--- Page 158 Text ---
g Pain threshold A swimmer’s shoulders
hurt when the tissue tolerance fails under the
applied load over a period of time. Once
the applied load surpasses the tissue
tolerance, pain occurs. Unfortunately, the
swimming community often doesn’t respond
appropriately to pain. Acceptance of pain
exists within the sport, limiting progress
for many swimmers, and for swimming
as a whole. The common communication
breakdown causes many swimmers to quit
swimming or swim through pain, creating
chronic pain, which may result in greater
tissue damage or altered psychological
coping with pain. Reducing the factors of
shoulder stress is key for limiting shoulder
pain, and promoting development.
Physical characteristics Training program Swimming technique
Shoulder stress
a
Stress factors The factors
contributing to the applied
load—the swimmer’s training
program, technique, and physical
characteristics—are the main
contributors for shoulder pain.
Altered physical Development Altered swimming
characteristics of shoulder technique
157
daoL
Applied load
Tolerance
Margin of safety
Pain
Applied load
Time
Factors contributing to shoulder stress

--- Page 159 Text ---
What rehabilitative measures How can I ease my
improve shoulder pain and shoulder pain, or
prevent shoulder injuries? even prevent it?
Reducing the load placed on the tissue is the primary method In order to prevent an injury at the overloaded posterior
of improving and preventing injuries in swimmers. However, rotator cuff musculature, swimmers should work continually
training load isn’t the only factor for rehabilitation and on biomechanics that reduce stress on these structures.
prevention. To improve an injury at the shoulder, it is necessary For example, they should improve coordination and timing
to understand which structures are overloaded and which have of the muscles of the rotator cuff, shoulder, and entire body.
failed. So a clear understanding of anatomy and kinetics Increasing strength and activation of the posterior rotator
(specifically pathokinetics, the study of movement involving cuff and surrounding structures, and indeed strengthening
improper biomechanics) is mandatory. Once the overloaded the entire kinetic chain, help to reduce overall shoulder stress,
structure is identified, then reducing the load here is paramount. and swimmers should ease into training volume and intensity
CH6 SP3 G2_B
at the start of each season to avoid overloading unprepared
This reduction in load can be achieved in a number of ways. tissues. And of course frequent soft tissue massage, proper
Reducing the actual movement load by cutting down training sleep and nutrition, and time away from the sport all help to
volume or intensity is effective, as is modifying technique to maximize recovery.
reduce stress on the affected tissue. Increasing both the
strength and mobility of the overloaded structure and tissues
around the injured area may also help ease the load on the
structure. To lessen the load imposed when out of the water,
swimmers should work to improve posture and movement
pattern during non-swimming activities too. These steps may
sound simple, but in fact can be extremely complex, beginning
with accurate diagnostics of the injured area. Therefore, having CH6 SP3 G2_A
proper communication with a support system of rehabilitation
and biomechanical specialists is vital in elite swimming. Injured infraspinatus and
teres minor
Shoulder injury prevention involves similar considerations
to rehabilitation. One obvious difference is that instead of
Supraspinatus
identifying an already overloaded tissue, we can use common
injury patterns as a tool for attempting to prevent such overload Deltoid
in the first place. In the shoulder, the posterior rotator cuff is
Infraspinatus
highly stressed in many swimmers due to the internal rotation
revolutions at the joint for an early vertical forearm, during the Teres minor
catch phase of the stroke. Teres major
Latissimus dorsi
158 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 160 Text ---
Cross-disciplinary intervention
a Team effort Cross-disciplinary Swimmer voices Sports scientists utilize Physical therapists and medical
initial onset of underwater stroke analysis practitioners practice evidence-
intervention is mandatory for optimizing
pain, accesses to identify potential based techniques while keeping
a swimmer’s return from shoulder health care biomechanical problems. athlete active with team.
injury. A team of biomechanics and system.
rehabilitation specialists, swim
coaches, and sometimes a sports
psychologist, are key. These disciplines
must communicate clearly and Swimmer remains
connected to team,
cohesively for a safe rehabilitation
recovers from injury,
and to reduce the risk of re-injury. decreases chance of
chronic injury.
Cross-disciplinary
recognition of
swimmer’s movement
analysis and training
demands.
Coach and exercise Coach follows evidence- Cross-disciplinary efforts
physiologists collaborate on based periodized program to increase evidence-
implementation of injury specific to swimmer’s based research and
prevention programs. training demands. implementation.
CH6 SP3 G2_A
Internal rotations at the joint to achieve an early
vertical forearm during the catch phase place
intense stress on the posterior rotator cuff.
g
Hard to place Even though many swimmers
have pain all around their shoulder, the majority of
swimmers’ shoulder injuries stem from the posterior
rotator cuff musculature: primarily the infraspinatus and
teres minor. These two muscles are rapidly stretched
during the catch phase, causing damage over time.
Swimmer experiences pain They often cause pain directly in the back of the
in shoulder and arm
shoulder, but also on the outside of the arm, near the
deltoid, and at the front of the arm, near the attachment
of the biceps tendon. The referred nature of this pain
frequently confuses practitioners and coaches.
159

--- Page 161 Text ---
Does using a kickboard Is using a
place higher stress on kickboard healthy?
the shoulders and back?
Many swimmers use a kickboard during training, for building leg The low back is also under stress while using a kickboard,
endurance. Indeed, the kickboard is the most used piece of especially if used with improper form. Many swimmers put
equipment in the sport of swimming, dating back to its first use their kickboard under their chest, to reduce shoulder stress
in the 1940s. It was originally created to help teach the kicking by decreasing shoulder flexion. However, the buoyancy of
action, though in fact the leg motions when using a kickboard the board elevates the chest and causes low back extension.
do not mimic the actual kicking motions of swimming. The Static low back extension can over-activate the quadratus
isolation of the legs may improve their endurance, but using lumborum and other low back muscles, increasing the risk
a kickboard also increases stress on the shoulders and low of strains in this area, and potentially resulting in facet joint
back and can increase the risk of injury to these areas. syndrome (see pages 162–163).
The position of the arms while swimming with a kickboard Additionally, the traditional kickboard position places the neck
places the shoulders in flexion. In shoulder flexion, the in extension. Although short periods in neck extension are not
supraspinatus tendon is elevated and more susceptible to hazardous, extended durations in this position can place extra
impingement under the acromion or the coracoacromial stress on the neck and increase the risk of neck strains and
ligament. This position also places a long stretch on the injuries. Limiting the amount of time using a kickboard and
posterior shoulder muscles—the teres minor, infraspinatus, instead placing greater emphasis on kicking during regular
rhomboids, and other muscles attaching to the shoulder swimming, or simply kicking in a streamline position, is a
blade (see pages 158–159). This can exacerbate instability, safer alternative with a higher likelihood of transferring skills
a common issue and risk factor for shoulder pain in swimmers. compared to board kicking.
Kick biomechanics
Kicking with a board
greater knee flexion
160 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 162 Text ---
Body position
Shoulders overstressed
Low back in extension
Poor body alignment
Neck in extension
Trapezius
Coracoacromial ligament
a Rhomboids
Over board The body position while kicking with a
Acromion Infraspinatus
board is not streamline, and places high levels of stress on
the shoulders at end-range of motion. Holding this position
Supraspinatus
increases stress on the labrum, an overstressed and often (rotator cuff) tendon Teres minor
injured shoulder area in swimmers. The posterior shoulder
muscles—the teres minor, infraspinatus, rhomboids, and
other muscles attaching to the shoulder blade—may also
be overextended. In addition, the buoyancy of the board
pushes many swimmers into lordosis (low back extension),
increasing stress on the quadratus lumborum and other low
back muscles and increasing the risk of low back injury.
d Quadratus
Kicking the habit Although the kickboard is currently
lumborum
a staple in training, the biomechanics of kicking with a board Labrum
are truly different to those while swimming, as shown here.
Coaches should instead use swimming sets focusing on
strong leg kicks and easy or moderate arms, or use
streamline kicking, rather than board-kicking drills. This
strategy will transfer skills more effectively to the sport,
and significantly reduce stresses on the swimmer’s body.
Kicking without board
greater hip flexion
161

--- OCR from Page 162 Image 8 ---
— Labrum

--- Page 163 Text ---
What stressors Why does my back
cause low back pain hurt when I swim?
during swimming?
The low back is the second most common site of injury in d Getting to the root of it Determining the cause of low back pain is essential
swimmers, after the shoulder. A recent study found that for pain resolution and prevention of recurrence. Too often low back pain is depicted
68% of elite swimmers had degenerated intervertebral discs as untreatable or unpredictable, but—while the complexity of the spine and its
at various levels, compared to just 29% of a control group involvement in every motion make it a difficult area for pain resolution and
of recreational swimmers.1 Discs L5 to S1, in the lower treatment—once the root cause is determined, removal of the painful stimulus and
symptom resolution is possible. The muscles in the low back actively maintain an
spine, were the most frequently degenerated in the elite
upright spine and streamlined position in the pool. These muscles contract during
swimming group. However, perhaps surprisingly, there was
spinal extension and can become overloaded during excessive backward bending,
no significant relationship between low back pain symptoms
as in a butterfly upkick. Swimmers, especially those already experiencing disc
and disc degeneration. This suggests that the fact that an
derangement or sciatica symptoms, should aim to maintain a relatively straight
area is damaged doesn’t necessarily mean it is a source of
spine during swimming and training.
pain. So, understanding which structures can create pain,
and the factors that may place excessive mechanical load
on these structures, is essential for management of low Causes of low back pain
back pain in swimmers.
Facet joint syndrome: The facet
Facet joint
joint lies between the transverse
processes of two consecutive
vertebrae. During movement, these Vertebra C1
areas can rub upon one another
Cervical
causing pain. Typically, spinal
vertebrae
extension and rotation can
Sciatic nerve
aggravate the facet joints. C7
T1
Spinal nerve
Compression Thoracic
Transverse process
vertebrae
Lumbar flexion: Between the
vertebrae are intervertebral discs, T12
which distribute stress. Flexing and
L1
twisting of the spine place most stress Sciatic nerve: The sciatic nerve
on these discs, increasing their risk of Lumbar originates from the spinal nerves of
derangement. Lumbar flexion occurs vertebrae vertebrae L4 to S3 and runs through
when the spine curves forward. As the the buttocks down the back of the leg.
f c r o o m nt p o re f s th se e d in , t t e h r e v e g r e t l e - b lik ra e l c d o is n c te s n a t r s e a re Her p n r ia e t s i s o u n r , e p o u n tt i ng I d n i t s e c rvertebral L5 T ex h c is e s n s e i r v v e e s c tr a e n s s b , e w co h m ic e h i m rr a it i a n t l e y d o w cc it u h r s
a spinal nerve S1
squeezed backward. This pressure may Sacral when the spine is flexed, causing pain
cause the disc to bulge, in a herniation. vertebrae in the low back and right down the leg.
S5
Coccyx-fused
162 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 164 Text ---
Common swimming technique errors
d
Modify technique Swimming technique is the most modifiable
factor for those experiencing low back pain in the pool. Here are
the most common technical flaws that increase low back stress.
Swimming “up hill” Lifting the chest
Swimming with the chest during butterfly
CH6_elSevatPed i4s a_ coGmmo5n error. B_Freestyle_Head-Up If a swimmer breathes forward
The lungs act as balloons in the and lifts the chest too high, the
chest, whose buoyancy tends to risk of injury to the low back
lift the upper body, placing a muscles is increased (see
stress on the low back. pages 50–51).
Forward breathing Low back extension
Breathing in freestyle during breaststroke
should be a smooth motion, Many breaststrokers keep the
in the horizontal plane. hips low and arch the low back
Unfortunately, many swimmers as they rise for the breath.
lift the head and breathe Unfortunately, this causes high
forward, which increases stress on the low back (see
stress on the low back. pages 50–51).
Spinal flexion turns
Hyper undulation
The flip turn undoubtedly
during dolphin kicks
causes spinal flexion. If
Excessive undulation is not only
swimmers experience low
biomechanically detrimental for
back pain during turns, they
speed, it also places excessive
can attempt to use more
stress on the low back, because
hip flexion than spinal
of the extra flexion and
flexion to reduce stress
extension.
on the low back.
163

--- Page 165 Text ---
What rehabilitative measures How can I ease my
improve low back pain and low back pain, or
prevent low back injuries? even prevent it?
Anyone with low back pain should seek medical assistance,
as every person and injury is different. However, there are
commonalities between injuries that can potentially be
improved by individuals on their own. First, proper diagnosis
to establish the root cause of the injury is essential (see pages
162–163). Once the cause and the movements that create
discomfort are determined, avoiding these painful movements
Spine is
is paramount. For low back issues, avoiding pain-causing
less stable
motions is challenging, as this area is involved in almost every
Diaphragm
body movement, but it is hugely important to do so. If you
Diaphragm
imagine your injury as a fire, each painful movement you descends
undertake is like throwing fuel into the fire, exacerbating the
situation. On the other hand, if you can avoid adding fuel to
the fire for an extended period, the fire will slowly burn out.
Performing activities that decrease pain is like dousing the
fire in water. Over time, the body can learn new patterns
of motor control to encourage rehabilitation and avoid
exacerbating injury.
In the low back, the lumbar discs and core muscles are often Hollowing
highly stressed in swimmers, from all the bending and twisting
that occur in the pool. In order to help prevent injury at the
overloaded core musculature, swimmers should continually
work on biomechanics that reduce stress on the low back.
For example, they should improve coordination and timing of
the muscles of the core, hips, and entire body, and aim to keep
low in the water, rather than swimming “up hill” (see page 163).
Increasing strength, stability, and activation of the core, gluteus
o
Brace yourself Bracing the core muscles of the diaphragm, abdominals, pelvic
muscles, and surrounding structures, and indeed strengthening
floor, and low back is essential in the prevention and rehabilitation of low back injury.
the entire kinetic chain, helps to reduce overall low back stress
Although many people don’t actually know how to brace and activate their core
and are key to preventing low back injury. Swimmers should
muscles, it is vital to become familiar with the process and practice frequently, as it
ease into training volume and intensity gradually at the start
greatly increases spinal stability compared to other abdominal activation methods.1
of each season to avoid overloading unprepared tissues. In
For example, abdominal hollowing (“sucking” the navel toward the spine) achieves far
addition, frequent soft tissue massage of the low back and
less activation than bracing, which results in a supportive “barrel-like” structure of
hip musculature, proper sleep and nutrition, and time away strengthened muscles all the way around the abdomen, with the diaphragm and
from the sport all help to maximize recovery. pelvic floor muscles parallel at the top and bottom.
164 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation
xedni
ytilibatS
Activating core muscles
All muscles
Abdominal muscles surrounding the
are “sucked” in core are tightened
toward spine
Pelvic floor
muscles contract Pelvic floor
Bracing
Hollowing Bracing
Time

--- Page 166 Text ---
d
Core values Endurance strength on all sides of the spine Average endurance times (seconds)
is essential for low back pain prevention and rehabilitation. This Exercise Men Women Bird dog
Starting on hands and knees,
multiplanar stability keeps the spine in a safe position during motion. Trunk extension 161 185 squeeze the gluteus muscles together
It also controls motion during more provocative movements, Trunk flexion 136 134 and brace the abdominals and other core
sometimes required for swimming. Certain exercises—including muscles to increase activation. Alternately
Right side bridge 95 75
extend pairs of opposite arm and leg (left
glute bridge, “bird dog,” and side bridges (side planks)—are
Left side bridge 99 78 arm with right leg, and vice versa), keeping
particularly effective in helping to build core stability and endurance.
the back flat and straight. A challenging
CH6 SP5 G2 A BirdDog
The table here shows some endurance times for extension, flexion, alternative is to perform “bird dog” over
CH6 SP5 G2 B BirdDog
and side bridge exercises, for a group of 21-year-old athletes. a stability ball, which provides an unstable
surface against which the core
These values are above average for the general population.
must work even harder to
maintain balance.
Bird dog
CH6 SP5 G2 NEW GLUTE A
Glute bridge
Glute bridge CH6 SP5 G2 NEW GLUTE B
Start on your back with your feet
shoulder width apart and your knees bent.
Press through your heels and bridge up
with your hips extending upward as high
as you can, without arching your back
(keep core muscles engaged), stretching
the hip flexors and contracting the
buttocks at the top.
Side bridge
Side bridge (side plank)
Lie on one side supported by the elbow,
with hips raised so that the body from
forms a straight line head to heels. The
shoulders should be stacked vertically
above the supporting elbow. Hold the
position for 30–45 seconds. As strength
improves, increase by 10–15 second
increments. Repeat on the
opposite elbow.
165

--- Page 167 Text ---
b u i l d i n g c o n f i d e n c e
SCIENCE
IN ACTION
a f t e r i n j u r y
It is widely understood that the mind is a powerful tool, crucially
affecting physical performance. For a swimmer, as for any athlete,
many emotional changes can occur during an injury, especially if
training must be suspended, and the most common mental adaptations
are fear, doubt, and isolation.
Being fearful after injury is natural, and helps to ensure a swimmer’s return to the
pool is gradual, avoiding setbacks or re-injury. Once the body has properly healed
and any painful stimulus is removed, retraining the brain and building confidence is
vital. Repeating a positive phrase or affirmation can be very effective in this regard.
For example, for 5–10 minutes during warm-up, a swimmer might repeat in his or her
head the short phrase “I’m strong, I’m healthy, and I’m ready to swim!” Visualization
techniques can also help to improve injured swimmers’ confidence, by developing
and maintaining the neural circuitry of swimming, even before returning to the pool.
Doubt about being healthy or being able to swim pain free is another problematic
adaptation during injury. Gradually increasing swimming volume and intensity
according to a carefully planned protocol can help the athlete reduce doubt and
see a clear timeline for return to full swimming participation.
During an injury, an athlete may feel isolated from their friends and teammates,
from the sport they love, and from exercise in general—finding solutions to alleviate
such isolation is key for reducing disengagement and depression. For example,
the swimmer should ideally continue to attend practices and engage in some
reduced form of the training, according to their carefully planned return-to-swimming
protocol, to help maintain their identity as a swimmer. Another option is for the
recovering swimmer to participate in certain forms of dryland exercise like cycling,
jogging, or boxing.
a
Focus the mind Simple, systematic
mental practices to control thought and build
confidence are vital in rehabilitation following
injury to return to maximum performance.
166 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 169 Text ---
What stressors cause Why do my knees
hip and knee pain and hips hurt
during swimming? when I swim?
In swimming, each stroke places specific stressors on the Other strokes can also lead to hip or knee pain. For example,
body—breaststroke places particular stress on the knees and excessive flutter and dolphin kick, particularly with a kickboard,
hips. It isn’t hard to imagine why the hips and knees are under place stress on the hip flexors, often resulting in hip flexor
more stress in breaststroke than during other strokes. First, the muscle strains. The knee is also under stress during flutter
legs are the main source of propulsion in breaststroke, whereas and dolphin kick, specifically the patellar tendon.
the arms provide a greater proportion of the propelling force in
the other strokes. Second, during breaststroke the legs
undergo an unorthodox movement for any sport. d Whipping up trouble Breaststroke requires a high degree of knee
flexion with large hip internal rotation, combined with hip adduction during
Breaststroke requires a high degree of knee flexion (nearly 130°) the “whipping” inkick portion of the stroke, which places particular stress on
with large hip internal rotation (approximately 40°). Knee flexion the medial collateral ligament on the inside of the knee joint. Many breaststroke
specialists report knee pain in this specific area.
and hip internal rotation allow the foot to travel far from the
midline of the body, while hip adduction then snaps the feet
together during the inkick (the “whipping” phase of the stroke).
Acetabulum (socket)
Pelvis
This hip motion rotates the head of the thigh bone (the femur)
Labrum
within the socket (the acetabulum), putting pressure on the
Gluteus maximus
inner lining of the joint, the labrum. In addition, it places stress
Tensor fascia lata
on the gluteus muscles and tensor fasciae latae, which control
Femur
hip inward rotation, as well as on multiple muscle tendons
across the front of the hip, particularly the hip flexors. The
many ligaments surrounding and stabilizing the hip joint are
also placed under unusual tension.
The combined motions of the breaststroke kick also elongate
the structures on the inside of the knee. One study found
that, of 36 breaststroke specialists, 86% had suffered knee
pain at least once, while 47.2% experienced pain in their knees
regularly.1 Stretching the medial knee components, including
the medial collateral ligament (MCL)—which attaches from the
inside of the thigh to the knee, limiting lateral motion and Extreme
creating stability—is problematic, and is the most common site knee flexion
Slight hip flexion
of knee pain in swimmers.2 The capsule surrounding the knee
joint, and the medial meniscus—a cushion pad between the
femur and the tibia (shin bone)—also experience particular
stress during breaststroke.
168 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 170 Text ---
Narrower inkick
a
Narrow view Breaststroke technique
has been evolving over the years, with many
swimmers transitioning to a narrower, higher
tempo kick. A narrower, faster inkick places
less stress on the hip, but potentially similar
stress on the knees.
Knees wider than shoulder width Knees shoulder-width apart
Knee flexion in breaststroke
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Quadriceps tendon
Femur
Patella Medial meniscus
Lateral collateral ligament
Medial collateral
Almost 130° Patellar tendon
ligament
knee flexion
Fibula
Tibia
Adduction
places stress
on medial knee
Slight hip abduction
40° internal hip rotation Hip adduction
during inkick
169

--- Page 171 Text ---
What rehabilitative How can I ease my
measures improve hip knee and hip pain,
and knee pain and prevent or even prevent it?
knee and hip injuries?
Hip pain in swimming is likely to be caused by one of three of repetitive knee action, so the forces cannot realistically be
injuries—hip flexor tendinopathy, labrum impingement, or avoided altogether. However, building the strength of the hips
adductor strain. Hip flexor tendinopathy results from repetitive and core musculature and improving range of motion at the
hip flexion, such as swimmers experience during the down hips help to redistribute the stresses, and reduce the forces
kick in freestyle. It is characterized by pain on the front of the on the medial compartment of the knee.
hip. Swimmers with labrum impingement, on the other hand,
report pain deep in the hip joint (the labrum is the protective
lining of the ball-and-socket joint). Overuse of the adductor
(groin) muscles can lead to strain, causing pain either within
the muscles of the inner thigh or at their attachment points
near the hip or, less commonly, at the pelvis.
So, modifying technique to minimize stress on the hip flexors,
labrum and adductor muscles can reduce pain and injury.
Encouraging a smaller hip flexion range of motion during the
freestyle kicking action is the first step for reducing hip flexor
tendinitis. Performing a narrower breaststroke kick decreases
tissue stress at the labrum and adductors, while increasing
gluteal strength eases stress on all these structures, since
the gluteus muscles are antagonists to the hip flexors and
adductors. Having adequate antagonist muscle strength
allows better control of motion at the joint, reducing stress.
Enhancing soft tissue hyperactivity can also improve all
these conditions. If these muscles are overworked and have
myofascial trigger points (knots), they can fatigue early and
become injured. If the muscle groups around the hips are
tight, they can add compressive force to the hip joint and
increase stress on the hip labrum.
Unlike in other sports, the majority of knee pain in swimming
is the result of repetitive distraction forces on the medial
compartment of the knee. Finding methods to reduce these
forces is the first step for improving and preventing knee
injuries. Unfortunately, this is difficult in swimming—
breaststroke, for example, necessarily involves this kind
170 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation
)%(
)CIVM(
noitcartnoc
cirtemosi
yratnulov
mumixam
fo
egatnecrep
egarevA
Gluteus
medius
Gluteus
maximus
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Side-lying hip abduction Hip clam Lunges

--- Page 172 Text ---
d a Roll it out Soft tissue treatments such Hip and knee muscles d Glute strength Gluteus muscle
as myofascial release can improve soft tissue strengthening is a key preventative measure for
Gluteus medius
Tensor
hyperactivity, easing trigger points, relieving hip and knee pain in swimmers. Many swimmers
fasciae lata Gluteus maximus
tightness around the hips and helping to reduce have under-developed gluteus muscles, which
potentially injurious stress on the labrum. It is limits the ability to control hip flexion and internal
possible to carry out some forms of such rotation, the main leg actions in swimming.
Tensor fasciae lata
treatments oneself—for example, using rollers or Creating a sequential strengthening progression
Sartorius
massage balls. Being able to correctly identify the is essential for swimmers and swim coaches,
Iliopsoas
muscles for manipulation and having the right with the swimmer focusing on gluteal activation,
tools are essential for successful soft tissue not simply performing the movement. A study to
management. When working on these muscles, measure and compare the degree of activation
make sure to start off with low pressure, and avoid of the gluteus maximus and gluteus medius
manipulation altogether when in the inflammatory muscles during various exercises, to determine
stage of an injury. Working on the hip flexors Iliotibial Adductors which most effectively recruit these muscles,
band
(iliopsoas, sartorius, rectus femoris), tensor fasciae found that the best exercise for the gluteus
latae, adductors, iliotibial band, gluteus muscles, medius was side-lying hip abduction, while
and quadriceps helps the most common the single-limb squat and single-limb deadlift
Biceps femoris (one of
Iliotibial
swimming-related knee and hip pain. the muscles comprising exercises led to the greatest activation of the
band
the hamstrings) gluteus maximus.1 This kind of information is
vital to swimmers and coaches to help plan
Rectus femoris (one of the muscles suitable strengthening programs.
comprising the quadriceps)
Gluteus muscle strengthening
CH6_SP7_G3_NEW
Using a foam massage ball
helps improve hip flexibility
Lunges Hops Single-leg squat Single-leg deadlift Lateral band walk
171

--- Page 173 Text ---
Does swimming increase Will swimming
the risk of osteoporosis? weaken my bones?
Your bones are made of living, growing tissue. An outer shell BMD than women (some evidence suggests that testosterone
of dense, cortical bone wraps round a sponge-like tissue may increase BMD), and a lack of estrogen after menopause
called trabecular bone. Like muscles, bone tissue breaks is believed to increase the risk of osteoporosis in women.
down and turns over. Although the turnover rate is very slow, Some individuals also seem to be genetically predisposed
it is crucial for creating strong, healthy bones. Osteoporosis to higher or lower BMD.
is a disease characterized by low bone mineral density (BMD)
and micro-architectural deterioration of bone tissue—the Of all the factors affecting BMD, physical stress on the bone
holes in the sponge-like trabecular tissue grow larger and and nutrition are the most easily modified—and therefore of
more numerous, with a consequent increase in bone fragility particular interest to athletes. Dietary calcium and magnesium
and susceptibility to fractures. play a significant role, and it is recommended that adults
consume 1000–13,000 mg/day of calcium and 100 mg/day
Age is one of several factors that affect bone mineral density. of magnesium for healthy bones. Activities that create a large
BMD increases the most just before and during puberty, ground reaction force, and therefore place stress on the bones,
and starts to decrease around age 35 when the rate of bone are important for increasing bone turnover and therefore
breakdown overtakes that of build-up. Sex and hormones improving BMD. Plyometric exercises such as jumping, for
are also influential—in general, men tend to have higher example, can make a significant contribution to bone health.
Measuring bone mineral content and density
CH6_SP8_G1_SCAN
172 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation
)3mc/g(
ydob
latot
,ytisned
larenim
enoB
erocs
T
tluda
gnuoY
Normal bone Very low bone
density density:
osteoporosis
1.38 2.0
1.30 1.0
1.22 0.0
1.14 –1.0
1.06 −2.0
0.98 −3.0
0.90 −4.0
0.82 −5.0
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Age (years)

--- Page 174 Text ---
Bone remodeling
Unlike most sports, of course, swimming does not involve
ground reaction force. Some stresses still occur as muscular
contractions pull on the bones, but generally swimmers have
lower BMD compared to ground-based athletes such as
basketball players. Swimmers don’t seem to have lower BMD
compared to sedentary controls, though, indicating that Stress from ground
Bone
reaction forces
swimming does not negatively affect bone mass.
Nevertheless, to improve the likelihood of good
bone health throughout life, strength and power
training is essential for swimmers, especially
during puberty, as BMD increases the most
at this time. By undertaking a suitable strength New bone formation Bone resorption by
by osteoblasts osteoclasts
and power training program alongside a proper
diet, including adequate calcium and magnesium,
swimmers should be able to build adequate BMD
Bone
during their years of maturation, helping reduce
the risk of osteoporosis later in life.
o
Bone building Osteoclasts and osteoblasts are cells that work (reduced bone mass) can occur. Plyometric exercises such as squat
together to maintain bone health. Osteoclasts are responsible for bone jumps are the best means of increasing ground reaction force, thereby
resorption—in response to stresses from ground reaction forces boosting bone turnover and remodeling. Unfortunately, many swimmers
during physical activity, for example—and osteoblasts then respond by perform squat jumps during dryland training with improper technique.
synthesizing matrix proteins to form new bone tissue, resulting in bone Coaches should always ensure that athletes use proper progressions
remodeling. When bone turnover is negative (the osteoclasts and biomechanics, or orthopedic injuries may occur which counter
outnumber the osteoblasts), bone density is reduced and osteopenia any benefit from potential bone remodeling (see pages 106–107).
g
Skeleton scanning Although some might think a lower bone mineral density
Male, Age 24, 70 in, 165 lb
would help improve swimming speed, by reducing the overall mass of the athlete, the
Bone mineral Young adult Age-matched additional mass from a higher BMD has no significant effect when the entire body
Region
density (g/cm3) T score Z score mass and drag are taken into account. The health and performance benefits of a
Head 2.112 higher BMD, on the other hand, are certainly significant long term, so it’s important
Arms 0.974 −0.1 −0.1 for swimmers to track their bone mineral content. DEXA (dual energy X-ray
Legs 1.332 −0.5 −0.5 absorptiometry) is the gold standard for measuring bone mineral content and density,
Trunk 1.001 0.0 0.2 as well as other metrics such as lean mass, fat mass, and body fat percentage.
Ribs 0.791 During the scan, a large arm passes over the athlete’s body, from which a narrow
Pelvis 1.263 beam of low-dose X-rays is sent through the body part being examined to measure
Spine 1.030 bone density in the center of the skeleton. The T score indicates how your BMD
Total body 1.210 –0.1 0.00 compares to that of a healthy 30 year old; the Z score compares your BMD to what
might be expected in someone your age and body size. The sloping lines on the graph
show projected bone density loss later in life.
173

--- Page 175 Text ---
e q u i p m e n t :
k i n e m a t i c s a n d
e l e c t r o m y o g r a p h y
Tracking motion and muscular activity is commonplace It is key to use this technology consistently during practice, so
in other sports, but in swimming the water has that swimmers become comfortable with it and see regular
made this difficult historically. Recently though, changes. Data measured on a single occasion cannot be
technological advances have made in-pool kinematics extrapolated over time—information about an individual’s
(measuring motion) and electromyography (measuring swimming style must be collected methodically over successive
muscle activity) much easier, helping to improve practices in order to provide meaningful feedback about that
performance and prevent swimming-related injuries. swimmer’s specific pattern of muscle activity and motion. It’s
also important to remember that video camera footage and
Specifically, a kinematic analysis measures the motion kinematic data can be distorted by the angle and perspective
of an action. Electromyography measures the electrical of the sensors, so it’s vital that an expert coach or physical
activity of individual muscles during an action. The use therapist analyze the information, to avoid potentially damaging
of electromyography in swimming dates back to the 1980s, misinterpretation.
when wires were connected to the swimmer. Over recent
decades, however, surface electromyography has been Of course, kinematics and electromyography can’t fix all
developed, in which waterproof electrodes on the swimmer’s problems or prevent all injuries, and the use of such technology
skin remotely transmit data about muscular activity to a must not be allowed to unduly slow down or impair the flow
computer. To monitor kinematics, underwater cameras and and intent of a swimming practice—but when deployed
sensors are placed on the swimmer, capturing the movements cautiously and with the contribution of the entire staff of the
of specific body parts. All this data is transferred to the team these tools can further improve our understanding of CH6_SP9_G2
computer using wireless technology. the sport, and greatly reduce the incidence of injuries.
If a coach or physical therapist can use electromyography
in order to identify a particular muscle firing at the incorrect
time, the swimmer can make specific stroking adjustments
or undertake strengthening programs to overcome this
improper firing pattern. Similarly, if a swimmer’s specific a No strings This swimmer has waterproof wireless
kinematics are analyzed, seeing the exact moment that his electrodes and sensors attached to his skin, to provide data for
or her biomechanics alter (due to fatigue, for example) can electromyography and kinematic analysis. The new surface
provide feedback for correction, hopefully before an injury electrode system means the swimmer is minimally disrupted
with wires or attachments, allowing more representative and
or tissue failure occurs.
meaningful data analysis. The swimmer first performs short,
maximal contractions to normalize the activity of the muscle to
be assessed. Then, while he swims normally, the electrical activity
of the muscle is measured and transmitted back to the computer.
174 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 176 Text ---
CH6_SP9_G1_POOLFIG
CH6_SP9_G2
CH6_SP9_G1_Oxy
CH6_SP9_G1_Cams
FileCAlqieunatnsexD aDtaataD GiarganpohsticsChannelsGainLimbUnitsRateSensorsHelp
CH6_SP9_G1_ElecMyo
CH6_SP9_G1_Speed
CH6_SP9_G1_Hand
y x O _ 1 G _ 9 P S _ 6 H C
Technological analysis
d
All the angles The analysis system shown here measures
a swimmer’s oxygen uptake, hand forces, kinematics (using
cameras to capture motion, and a towing system to measure
speed), and muscular activation (using electromyography).
All the captured data is transmitted wirelessly to a computer,
so there are no wires attached to the swimmer. However, the
speedometer tow and oxygen-uptake fixture are likely to alter
swimming stroke and style, so this system is better
suited for theoretical or research use, rather than to
provide feedback directly benefiting an individual
swimmer during regular training. Kinematics: cameras for motion capture Oxygen uptake
Kinematics: speedometer Electromyography Hand force
Wireless data
175

--- Page 177 Text ---
Is cramping caused by nutritional Why do I get
deficiency or by biomechanical cramps when
and training factors? I swim?
Cramping, or exercise-associated muscle cramp (EAMC), Although emerging research does not dismiss nutritional
occurs frequently in swimmers, especially when using fins or deficiency or dehydration as possible contributors to cramping, it
during kicking sets. Historically, many believed that cramping certainly doesn’t support the idea that they are its primary cause.
is caused by a nutritional deficiency or dehydration, but For example, in one study researchers tried to induce cramping
scientific literature has cast doubt on this theory.1,2 Like in groups of hydrated and dehydrated participants—and found
many phenomena, cramping may have various origins, that dehydration did not increase the risk of cramping.3 Another
or result from multiple factors in combination. study of 210 triathletes taking part in an Ironman event found
that dehydration and sodium (electrolyte) changes did not
Most often cramping occurs in times of fatigue, directly after increase cramping—rather, a history of previous cramping, and
a hard set, or early in the season, for example. Fatigue is increased running speed (indicating higher exercise intensity)
complex, having origins in the muscle (peripheral fatigue) were associated with more frequent muscle cramps.2
as well as in the brain and spinal cord (central fatigue). The
CH6_SP10_G1
mechanism of muscle cramping is poorly understood, but So, we know that a past history of cramping is a risk factor for
central and peripheral overload during fatigue may cause future episodes. This effect could possibly be down to the
a “short circuit,” altering neuromuscular control. psychological impact of an athlete knowing they cramp easily,
being fearful of it happening again and consequently over-
activating a muscle, potentially leading to cramping.
Self-massage Alternatively, it could be because the athlete has a genetic
predisposition to cramping. For example, a cross-sectional
survey study of 1300 marathon runners highlighted family
history of EAMC as a factor associated with runners’ own
When cramping occurs, statically
frequency of cramping.4
stretch or perform self-massage
at the cramp location, to ease
the symptoms.
In summary, cramping is common in swimming, but little is
known about its causes. Much more research is needed to
uncover its mechanisms and understand how to help prevent
this issue for future generations of swimmers.
g
Feeling cramped Pushing your limits is necessary for elite
performance in swimming—but the resulting fatigue may well result
in cramping, so having a systematic prevention strategy is key.
Systematically build up training intensity over time, and avoid exercising
in humid conditions. Although there’s no clear evidence that nutrition or
hydration affect the frequency of cramping, nevertheless eat a nutrient-
rich diet and properly replenish fluids, to maintain optimum health.
176 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 178 Text ---
How cramp occurs
Cardiac output
Capillary density Total blood volume
(volume of blood pumped per minute)
Blood perfusion of muscles
Delivery of oxygenated blood,
Muscle fiber composition
and removal of lactate
(e.g. density of mitochondria)
and hydrogen ions
d
Muscle balance One factor contributing to muscle cramping
during intense swimming may be the ability of the heart to supply
sufficient oxygenated blood to the working muscles. An inadequate
blood supply, together with a limited ability of the muscle tissue to
then utilize the delivered oxygen (because of the particular muscle
fiber composition), may result in greater anaerobic metabolism.
Skeletal muscle fatigue and cramp
The build up of anaerobic metabolites (hydrogen ions) in the
working muscle may then affect the delicate balance between
excitatory and inhibitory input from sense organs in the muscle
tissue to motor neurons originating in the spinal cord, resulting When the muscle is contracted,
sense organs in the tendon
in uncontrolled muscle spasm, or cramping.
called Golgi organs send an
inhibitory signal to the spinal
cord to relax the muscle Cramp occurs when the
excitatory input overwhelms the
inhibitory input, so the muscle
Vertebral column, spasms uncontrollably
housing the spinal cord
When the muscle stretches, sense
Inhibitory
organs called muscle spindles send
an excitatory signal to the spinal
cord to contract the muscle
Contraction Excitatory
177

--- Page 179 Text ---
What physiological and How does sports
biomechanical adaptations taping help me?
occur during sports taping?
Sports taping has been commonly used in rehabilitation for Taping may also help reduce inflammation. After any acute
athletes for decades, but the 2012 London Olympics brought injury there is a large inflammatory component, which causes
more public attention to the practice, when gold medalist an increase of material in a confined space. This increase
volleyball players competed wearing colored and spiraled causes certain structures to rub against one another, potentially
kinesio tape. Since then, the use of sports tape has been triggering compensations and other impairments. Tape can be
much more widespread—even though the rationale for its use used to disperse the inflammation, decreasing the volume and
and the extent of its effectiveness are not completely clear. preventing compensations.
Most of the recent literature on taping does not show that Despite these claims, taping should be used as an adjunct
it improves performance in healthy individuals, and research to scientifically proven approaches to injury prevention and
on its effectiveness for athletes with specific injuries has not symptom improvement, not as the only method. Additionally, it
yet been done. Despite the limited scientific evidence, many should not be used for prolonged periods, as dependency can
swimmers feel sports tape can help them recover from injury, develop—taping does seem to help to a certain extent, but it
and can benefit performance (though its use during swimming often becomes used as a “security blanket” when muscles
competitions is currently illegal). need improvement to reach full performance. The optimum
duration for using tape is tough to predict, but as symptoms
There are various possible methods by which taping may improve, the frequency of application should be decreased.
benefit swimmers. First, it may reduce muscle over-activation,
which can alter normal resting position and reduce strength.
So, if a swimmer has tight, overactive muscles, taping can be
used to inhibit and lengthen these tissues, to restore proper
motor control and strength.
NEED TO KNOW
Certain taping techniques are theorized to improve
Common types of sports tape:
neuromuscular firing patterns, allowing a swimmer to perform
• R igid tape is firm and sticky, reducing
a given task using the proper muscles. Muscles may have the
movement at a joint and providing stability.
capacity to perform specific tasks, but various circumstances
• B ase tape is softer, typically used to protect
(such as injury, or compensations for pain or weakness
the skin under a rigid tape.
elsewhere) can lead to improper positioning and muscle
• K inesio tape adjusts to the skin and glides
dormancy—taping can hold the muscles in the right positions,
as you move.
cuing dormant muscles to fire at appropriate times and
potentially improving overall motor control.
178 Injury Prevention and Rehabilitation

--- Page 180 Text ---
CH6_SP11_G2_A
CH6_SP11_G2_B CH6_SP11_G2_C
Upper trapezius taping
Levator scapulae
Trapezius
(behind trapezius)
Deltoids
Scapula
(should blade)
Latissimus
dorsi
1. First, clean the skin with rubbing 2. Apply one end of the sports tape 3. Pull tight to obtain wrinkles in
alcohol, and then lay down base at the lateral end of the collar bone, the skin. Apply the end of the tape
tape perpendicular to the levator near the acromioclavicular joint. Lay at the medial border of the
CscaHpul6ae_ mSuscPle,1 an1d _to Gthe2 up_peDr thCe taHpe6 pe_rpSenPdic1ula1r t_o tGhe 2lev_atEor shCoulHder6 bl_adSe.P11_G2_F
trapezius muscle, as shown. scapulae muscle, pulling toward the
medial aspect of the shoulder blade.
a
Hold the position Upper trapezius over-activation
is common in swimmers. This taping procedure is
believed to decrease muscle tightness in the upper
trapezius and levator scapulae—advocates believe that
laying a piece of tape perpendicular to each muscle
inhibits over-activity. It also provides a strong positional
cue, preventing rounded shoulders by helping the
swimmer keep the shoulder blades retracted.
d
Getting the low down Low back taping can
create rigidity of the spine and provide support when
needed. Often, athletes move too much from their low 4. Repeat for the upper trapezius 5. Extend the tape just past the 6. Apply the end of the tape
back, causing pain. This can be damaging if they are in muscle. Apply one end of the tape lower angle of the shoulder blade. just past the lower angle of the
just next to the collar bone (find the Pull tight to obtain wrinkles in shoulder blade, and press for
the inflammatory phase of an injury or if they continue
most sensitive, trigger-point area), the skin. firm adhesion.
to perform mechanical movements that aggravate their and pull firmly over the belly of the
CH6_SP11_G3_b
low back pain. Specific taping of this nature helps to CHup6pe_r tSraPpez1iu1s._G3_cCH6_SP11_G3_d CH6_SP11_G3_e
CH6_SP11_G3_a CH6_SP11_G3_f
limit spinal flexion.
Low back taping
1. Clean the skin with 2. Ask the swimmer to 3. Pull down firmly to 4. Repeat on the other 5. Ask the swimmer to 6. The taping limits spinal
rubbing alcohol, and slightly arch the back into obtain wrinkles in side. ease slightly into spinal flexion, providing support
apply two strips of base extension. Apply the sticky the skin. flexion while you rub the for the low back.
tape parallel to the spine. sports tape near the top of tape to stick.
one piece of base tape.
179

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 1 ---
aan the ekin with

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 2 ---
lean the skin with

hinn aleanhal and

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 4 ---
{. Clean the skin wit

es cc 0

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 5 ---
al

Ask the swimmer to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 6 ---
a

\sk the swimmer to

Inthe eaerein the heel tnt

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 7 ---
. Ask the swimmer to

Mahkth: arah tha hanvl, 1

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 9 ---
YQ Dill davin firmh:

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 10 ---
3. Pull down firmly to

ar rer ee eee oe

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 11 ---
3. Pull down firmly to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 12 ---
ll dawn firmly to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 13 ---
ull down firmly to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 14 ---
ull down firmly to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 15 ---
ull down firmly to

min iasnnnizlan in

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 16 ---
. Pull down firmly to

Ktatin varrintvylac in

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 17 ---
. Pull down firmly to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 18 ---
Dilll davai fir mh: ta

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 19 ---
angaat nn tha nthar

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 20 ---
Gt

eaneat on the other

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 21 ---
GH

‘epeat on the other

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 22 ---
<f

peat on the other

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 23 ---
tI

. Repeat on the other
el

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 24 ---
ei

‘Repeat on the other

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 25 ---
Darnant an tha nthar

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 26 ---
fi

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 27 ---
A Danast an tha nt

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 28 ---
fi

4. Repeat on the ot

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 29 ---
fi

4, Repeat on the of

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 30 ---
fi

4, Repeat on the othe

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 31 ---
fi

4, Repeat on the othe

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 32 ---
A M2. eek ke Lk

an ae

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 34 ---
sk the swimmer to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 35 ---
sk the swimmer to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 36 ---
sk the swimmer to

a olinhth: intn cninal

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 37 ---
sk the swimmer to
slightly into spinal

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 38 ---
. Ask the swimmer to
ace slightly into sninal

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 39 ---
Ask the swimmer to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 40 ---
Ask the swimmer to

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 42 ---
FB Ack the evwimmer

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 43 ---
5, Ask the swimme

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 44 ---
5. Ask the swimme

ee

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 45 ---
5. Ask the swimmer

anasy olinhth: intn onin

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 46 ---
5. Ask the swimmer 1

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 47 ---
F Ack thea ounmmar t

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 49 ---
ha tanina limite eninal

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 50 ---
he taping limits spinal

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 51 ---
he taping limits spina

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 52 ---
he taping limits spina

mn OoArn cing olunannrt

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 53 ---
. The taping limits spit

avINnN nrnwidingn cunanc

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 54 ---
. The taping limits spi

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 55 ---
Tha taning limite ent

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 57 ---
& The tanina limite

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 58 ---
6. The taping limits

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 59 ---
6. The taping limits

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 60 ---
6. The taping limits s;

flavin neprmitAttnan rin

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 61 ---
6. The taping limits s

--- OCR from Page 180 Image 62 ---
LD Ther tanina limita oa

--- Page 181 Text ---
Notes
CHAPTER 1 hydrodynamics 2. J. C. Chatard and B. Wilson (2003) “Drafting distance in 2. D. A. Marinho, T. M. Barbosa, V. M. Reis, P. L. Kjendlie, F. B.
swimming,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, Alves, J. P. Vilas-Boas, L. Machado, A. J. Silva, and A. I. Rouboa
PAGES 14–15 35(7), 1176–1181. (2010) “Swimming propulsion forces are enhanced by a small
1. G. Lecrivain, A. Slaouti, C. Payton, and I. Kennedy, (2008) 3. D. Chollet, O. Hue, F. Auclair, G. Millet, and J. C. Chatard finger spread,” Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 26, 87–92.
“Using reverse engineering and computational fluid dynamics
(2000) “The effects of drafting on stroking variations during 3. J. P. Vilas-Boas, R. J. Ramos, R. J. Fernandes, A. J. Silva, A. I.
to investigate a lower arm amputee swimmer’s performance”,
swimming in elite male triathletes,” European Journal of Rouboa, L. Machado, T.M. Barbosa, and D. A.Marinho (2015)
Journal of Biomechanics, 41(13), 2855–2859.
Applied Physiology, 82(5-6), 413–417. “Hydrodynamic analysis of different finger position in swimming:
2. D. A. Marinho, A. J. Silva, V. M. Reis, T. M. Barbosa, J. P. 4. A. J. Silva, A. Rouboa, A. Moreira, V. M. Reis, F. Alves, J. P. a computational fluid dynamics approach,” Journal of Applied
Vilas-Boas, F. B. Alves, L. Machado, and A. I. Rouboa (2011) Vilas-Boas, and D. A. Marinho (2008) “Analysis of drafting Biomechanics, 31, 48–55.
“Three-dimensional CFD analysis of the hand and forearm in
swimming”, Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 27, 74–80. effects in swimming using computational fluid dynamics,” PAGES 32–33
Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 7(1), 60–66. 1. T. M. Barbosa, R. J. Fernandes, K. L. Keskinen, P. Colaço,
3. C. Caspersen, P. A. Berthelsen, M. Eik, C. Pâkozdi, and
C. Cardoso, A. J. Silva, and J. P. Vilas-Boas (2006) “Evaluation
P. L. Kjendlie (2010) “Added mass in human swimmers: age PAGES 24–25
and gender differences”, Journal of Biomechanics, 43(12), 1. T. M. Barbosa, J. E. Morais, M. C. Marques, A. J. Silva, D. A. of the energy expenditure in competitive swimming strokes,”
2369–2373. Marinho, and Y. H. Kee (2015) “Hydrodynamic profile of young International Journal of Sports Medicine, 27, 894–899.
swimmers: changes over a competitive season,” Scandinavian 2 . T. M. Barbosa, K. L. Keskinen, R. J. Fernandes, and J. P.
PAGES 16–17 Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports, 25, e184–e196. Vilas-Boas (2008) “The influence of stroke mechanics into
1. M. H. Dickinson (1996) “Unsteady mechanisms of force 2. A. R. Vorontsov and V. A. Rumyantsev (2000) “Resistive energy cost of elite swimmers,” European Journal of Applied
generation in aquatic and aerial locomotion,” American Forces in Swimming,” In V. M. Zatsiorsky (ed), Biomechanics Physiology, 103, 139–149.
Zoologist, 36(6), 537–554.
in Sport. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Science, pp. 184–204. 3. T. M. Barbosa, P. Morouço, S. Jesus, W. Feitosa, M. J. Costa,
2. H. Toussaint and M. Truijens (2005) “Biomechanical aspects 3. H. M. Toussaint (2002) “Biomechanics of propulsion and D. A. Marinho, A. J. Silva, and N. D. Garrido (2013) “Interaction
of peak performance in human swimming,” Animal Biology, drag in front crawl swimming,” International Symposium on between speed fluctuation and swimming velocity in young
55(1), 17–40. Biomechanics in Sports, Extremadura, pp. 13–22. competitive swimmers,” International Journal of Sports
3. R. Arellano (1999) “Vortices and Propulsion” in R. Sanders Medicine, 34(2), 123–130.
4. T. Wei, R. Mark, and S. Hutchison (2014) “The fluid dynamics
and J. Linsten, Applied Proceedings of the XVII International of competitive swimming,” Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 4. S. V. Kolmogorov, O. A. Rumyantseva, B. J. Gordon and J. M
Symposium on Biomechanics in Sports: SWIMMING, School of 46, 547–565. Cappaert (1997) “Hydrodynamic characteristics of competitive
Biomedical and Sports Science, Edith Cowan University, Perth, swimmers of difference genders and performance levels,”
Western Australia, pp53–65. Also available at: http://wdb.ugr. 5. P. L. Kjendlie and R. K. Stallman (2008) “Drag characteristics Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 13, 88–97.
es/~arellano/wp-content/uploads/1999ArellanoISBS2.pdf of competitive swimming children and adults,” Journal of
Applied Biomechanics, 24, 35–42. PAGES 34–35
4. T. M. Barbosa, J. E. Morais, M. C. Marques, A. J. Silva, D. A.
1. D. Pendergast, P. Zamparo, P. E. Di Prampero, C. Capelli,
Marinho, and Y. H. Kee (2015) “Hydrodynamic profile of young PAGES 28–29
P. Cerretelli, A. Termin, A. Craig Jr, D. Bushnell, D. Paschke, and
swimmers: Changes over a competitive season,” Scandinavian 1. V. J. Deschodt, L. M. Arsac, and A. H. Rouard (1999) “Relative
J. Mollendorf (2003) “Energy balance of human locomotion in
Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports, 25(2), e184–e196. contribution of arms and legs in humans to propulsion in 25-m
water,” European Journal of Applied Physiology, 90(3–4),
5. J. C. Mollendorf, A. C. Termin, E. R. I. C. Oppenheim, and D. sprint front-crawl swimming,” European Journal of Applied 377–386.
R. Pendergast (2004) “Effect of swim suit design on passive Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 80(3), 192–199.
2. J. E. Morais, M. C. Marques, D. A. Marinho, A. J. Silva, and
drag,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 36(6), 2. M. H. Dickinson (1996) “Unsteady mechanisms of force
T. M. Barbosa (2014) “Longitudinal modeling in sports: Young
1029–1035. generation in aquatic and aerial locomotion,” American
swimmers’ performance and biomechanics profile,” Human
Zoologist, 36(6), 537–554.
PAGES 18–19 movement science, 37, 111–122.
1. T. M. Barbosa, M. J. Costa, J. E. Morais, P. Morouço, 3. H. M. Toussaint (2000) “An alternative fluid dynamic 3. H. M. Toussaint, T. Janssen, and M. Kluft (1991) “Effect of
M. Moreira, N. Garrido, D. A. Marinho and A. J. Silva (2013) explanation for propulsion in front crawl swimming,” in propelling surface size on the mechanics and energetics of front
“Characterization of speed fluctuation and drag force in young Proceedings of the XVIII International Symposium on crawl swimming,” Journal of Biomechanics, 24(3), 205–211.
swimmers: A gender comparison,” Human Movement Science, Biomechanics in Sports, Applied Program. Hong Kong, China:
32, 6, 1214–1225. Chinese University of Hong Kong, pp. 96–103. 4. Z. Huang, K. Kurobe, M. Nishiwaki, G. Ozawa, T. Tanaka, N.
Taguchi, and F. Ogita (2010) “Relationship between propelling
2. H. M. Toussaint, A. P. Hollander, C. Van den Berg and 4. H. M. Toussaint, C.Van den Berg, and W. J. Beek (2002) “ efficiency and swimming performance in elite swimmers,” in
A. Vorontsov (2000) “Biomechanics of swimming,” ‘Pumped-up propulsion’ during front crawl swimming,” P. L. Kjendlie, R. K. Stallman, and J. Cabri (eds) Biomechanics
Exercise and Sport Science, 639–660. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 34(2), 314–319. and Medicine in Swimming XI. Oslo, Norway: Norwegian School
3. A. R. Vorontsov, and V. A. Rumyantsev (2000) “Resistive 5. R. E. Schleihauf (1979) “A hydrodynamic analysis of of Sport Sciences, pp. 201–203.
Forces in Swimming and Propulsive Forces in Swimming,” swimming propulsion,” in J. Terauds and E. W. Bedingfield (eds) 5. P. Zamparo, D. R. Pendergast, B. Termin, and A. E. Minetti
in V. M. Zatsiorsky (ed) Biomechanics in Sport: Performance International Series on Sports Sciences, Vol 8, Swimming III. (2002) “How fins affect the economy and efficiency of human
enhancement and Injury Prevention: Olympic Encyclopeadia Baltimore, USA: University Park Press, pp. 70–109. swimming,” Journal of Experimental Biology, 205(17),
of Sports Medicine Vol IX. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell. 6. B. S. Rushall, E. J. Sprigings, L. E. Holt, and J. M. Cappaert 2665–2676.
PAGES 22–23 (1994) “A re-evaluation of forces in swimming,” Journal of 6. G. Nicolas, B. Bideau, B. Colobert, and E. Berton (2007) “How
1. D. R. Bassett Jr, J. Flohr, W. J. Duey, E. T. Howley, and R. L. Swimming Research, 10, 6–30. are Strouhal number, drag, and efficiency adjusted in high level
Pein (1991) “Metabolic responses to drafting during front crawl PAGES 30–31 underwater monofin-swimming?” Human Movement Science,
swimming,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 1. M. A. Berger, G. de Groot, and A. P. Hollander (1995) 26(3), 426–442.
23(6), 744–747. “Hydrodynamic drag and lift forces on human hand/arm
models,” Journal of Biomechanics, 28(2), 125–133.
180 Notes

--- Page 182 Text ---
PAGES 36–37 3. R. Havriluk (2006) “Analyzing hand force in swimming: Blackwell and R. S. Sanders (eds), Proceedings of
1. R. Vennell, D. Pease, and B. Wilson (2006) “Wave drag on Three typical limiting factors,” American Swimming Magazine, the XIX International Symposium of Biomechanics in
human swimmers,” Journal of biomechanics, 39(4), 664–671. 2006(3), 14–18. Sports. San Francisco, CA: University of San Francisco
2. T. M. Barbosa, J. E. Morais, P. Forte, H. Neiva, N. D. Garrido, 4. R. Havriluk (2012) “Improving performance in swimming: (pp. 122–126).
and D. A. Marinho (2015) “A comparison of experimental and Strength and technique,” Swimming in Australia, 32(4), 14–16. 4. M. A. M. Berger, G. de Groot, and A. P. Hollander (1995)
analytical procedures to measure passive drag in human “Hydrodynamic drag and lift forces on human hand/arm
PAGES 46–47
swimming,” PLoS ONE 10(7), e0130868. models,” Journal of Biomechanics, 28(2), 125–133.
1. B. Prichard (1993) “A new swim paradigm: Swimmers
3. R. Arellano, S. Pardillo, and A. Gavilán (2002) “Underwater generate propulsion from the hips,” Swimming Technique, 5. P. Remmonds and R. M. Bartlett (1981) “Effects of finger
undulatory swimming: Kinematic characteristics, vortex 30, 17–23. separation,” Swimming Technique, 18(1), 28–30.
generation and application during the start, turn and swimming 6. B. Bixler &andS. Riewald (2002) “Analysis of a swimmer’s
PAGES 52–53
strokes,” in Proceedings of the XXth International Symposium 1. D. Chollet, S. Chalies, and J. C. Chatard (2000) “A new index hand and arm in steady flow conditions using computational
on Biomechanics in Sports. Granada, Spain: Universidad de Granada. of coordination for the crawl: description and usefulness,” fluid dynamics,” Journal of Biomechanics, 35, 713–717.
4. J. J. Rohr and F. E. Fish (2004) “Strouhal numbers and International Journal of Sports Medicine, 21(1), 54–59. PAGES 64–65
optimization of swimming by odontocete cetaceans,” Journal
2. L. Seifert (2010) “Inter-limb coordination in swimming,” 1. R. Havriluk (2014) “Freestyle Hand Path,” Swimming World,
of Experimental Biology, 207(10), 1633–1642.
Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming XI. Oslo, Norway: 55(3), 50–51.
5. A. V. Loebbecke, R. Mittal, , F. Fish, and R. Mark (2009) Norwegian School of Sport Sciences (pp. 35–39). 2. D. A. Levinson (1987) “Internal stroke motions and the
“A comparison of the kinematics of the dolphin kick in humans
3. R. Havriluk (2015) “Swimming technique misconceptions: effective coaching of stroke mechanics,” Journal of Swimming
and cetaceans,” Human Movement Science, 28(1), 99–112.
Arm coordination II,” Swimming World, 56(12), 10–11. Research, 3(2), 21–28.
6. A. Lyttle, B. Blanksby, B. Elliot, and D. Lloyd (1999) “Optimal
4. R. Havriluk (2015) “Swimming technique misconceptions: 3. R. Havriluk (2016). Approaching Perfect Freestyle + Science.
depth for streamlined gliding,” in K. L. Keskinen, P. V. Komi, and
Arm coordination I,” Swimming World, 56(11), 10–11. Tallahassee, FL: Swimming Technology Research.
A. P. Hollander (eds), Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming
VIII, Jyväskylä, Finland: University of Jyväskylä, pp. 165–170. PAGES 54–55 PAGES 66–67
1. L. Seifert (2010) “Inter-limb coordination in swimming,” in 1. T. Becker and R. Havriluk (2014) “Freestyle arm entry effects
PAGES 38–39
Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming XI. Oslo: Norwegian on shoulder stress, force generation, and arm synchronization,”
1. T. M. Barbosa, M. J. Costa, J. E. Morais, P. Morouço,
School of Sport Sciences (pp. 35–39). in B. Mason (ed), Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming XII.
M. Moreira, N. D. Garrido, D. A. Marinho, A. J. Silva (2013)
Canberra, Australia: Australian Institute of Sport.
“Characterization of speed fluctuation and drag force in young 2. A. B. Craig, B. Termin, & D. R. Pendergast (2006)
swimmers: a gender comparison,” Human Movement Science, “Simultaneous recordings of velocity and video during 2. A. Abgarov, J. Fraser-Thomas, and J. Baker (2012)
32, 1214–1225. swimming,” Portuguese Journal of Sport Sciences, 6(2) 32–35. “Understanding trends and risk factors of swimming-related
injuries in varsity swimmers,” Clinical Kinesiology, 66(2), 24.
2. M. Cortesi and G. Gatta (2015) “Effect of the swimmer’s head 3. E. W. Maglischo (2003) Swimming fastest. Champaign, IL:
position on passive drag,” Journal of Human Kinetics, 49(1), Human Kinetics. 3. R. Havriluk and J. Mullen (2014) “Preventing swimming
37–45. 4. G. Sokolovas (2009) “Changes of swimming velocity during injuries”, Invited presentation at the International Swim Coaches
Conference, Clearwater, Florida, USA.
3. J. P. Vilas-Boas, L. Costa, R. J. Fernandes, J. Ribeiro, P. the swim cycle,” Swimming World, 50(6), 37–38.
Figueiredo, D. Marinho, A. J. Silva, A. I.Rouboa, and L. Machado 4. R. Havriluk (2014) “Skill acquisition and injury prevention,”
PAGES 56–57
(2010) “Determination of the drag coefficient during the first Invited presentation at the FINA Golden Coach Clinic, Doha,
1. T. J. Becker and R. Havriluk (2010) “Quantitative data
and second gliding positions of the breaststroke underwater Qatar.
supplements qualitative evaluation of butterfly swimming,”
stroke,” Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 26(3), 324–331.
Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming XI. Oslo, Norway: CHAPTER 3 pool training
4. D. A. Marinho, V. M. Reis, F. B. Alves, J. P. Vilas-Boas, Norwegian School of Sport Sciences
L. Machado, A. J. Silva, and A. I. Rouboa (2009) “Hydrodynamic PAGES 70–71
PAGES 58–59
drag during gliding in swimming,” Journal of Applied 1. B. Hiddlestone (2014) “Concept paper for the evolution of
1. R. Havriluk (2010) “Performance-level differences in
Biomechanics, 25(3), 253–257. systematic skill development in swimming”, Swimming in
swimming: Relative contributions of strength and technique,”
5. H. Zaidi, R. Taïar, S. Fohanno, and G. Polidori (2008) in P-L. Kjendlie, R. K. Stallman, and J. Cabri (eds), Australia, 31(1) 21–31.
“Analysis of the effect of swimmer’s head position on Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming XI. Oslo, Norway: 2. R. Havriluk (2006) “Magnitude of the effect of an
swimming performance using computational fluid dynamics,” Norwegian School of Sport Science. instructional intervention on swimming technique and
Journal of Biomechanics, 41(6), 1350–1358. performance”, in J. P. Vilas-Boas, F. Alves, A. Marques (eds)
PAGES 60–61
“Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming X”, Portuguese
CHAPTER 2 technique 1. R. Havriluk (2007) “Improving performance in swimming: Journal of Sport Sciences, 6(Suppl. 2) 218–220.
Swimsuit and technique resistance factors,” Swimming in
PAGES 42–43 Australia, 24(1), 22–23. 3. R. Havriluk (2014) “The effect of deliberate practice on the
1. R. Havriluk (2010) “Performance level differences in technique of national caliber swimmers”, in B. Mason (ed),
swimming: Relative contributions of strength and technique,” PAGES 62–63 Proceedings of the XIIth International Symposium on
in P-L. Kjendlie, R. K. Stallman, and J. Cabri (eds), 1. R. E. Schleihauf, Jr. (1979) “A hydrodynamic analysis of Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming, Australian
Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming XI. Oslo, Norway: swimming propulsion,” in J. Terauds and E. W. Bedingfield (eds), Institute of Sport, Canberra.
Swimming III. Baltimore, MA: University Park Press (pp.
Norwegian School of Sport Science. 70–109). PAGES 72–73
PAGES 44–45 2. Y. Sato and T. Hino (2002) “Estimation of thrust of swimmer’s 1. K. A. Ericsson, R. T. Krampe, C. and Tesch-Römer
1. R. Havriluk (2016). Approaching Perfect Freestyle + Science. (1993) “The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of
hand using CFD,” Proceedings of 8th Symposium on Nonlinear
Tallahassee, FL: Swimming Technology Research. expert performance,” Psychological Review, 100(3), 363.
and Free-Surface Flows. Hiroshima, Japan: University of
2. R. Havriluk (2004) “Hand force and swimming velocity,” in Hiroshima (pp. 71–75). 2. R. Havriluk (2016) “Reject conventional wisdom for a
15th FINA World Sports Medicine Congress. Indianapolis. competitive advantage: Don’t swim like Phelps,” Invited
3. H. Takagi, Y. Shimizu, A. Kurashima, and R. Sanders (2001)
Available at: https://swimmingtechnology.com/hand-force-and- presentation at the MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference,
“Effect of thumb abduction and adduction on hydrodynamic
swimming-velocity. Boston, March 2016.
characteristics of a model of the human hand,” in J. R.
181

--- Page 183 Text ---
3. S. M. Jefferies, C. M. Jefferies, and S. Donohue (2012) “The www.swimmingworldmagazine.com/news/the-scientific-basis- 5. V. D. Kame, D. R. Pendergast, and B. Termin (1990)
effect of real-time feedback on swimming technique,” Journal and-benefits-of-reduced-training-distance “Physiologic responses to high intensity training in competitive
of the International Society of Swimming Coaching, 2, 41–49. university swimmers,” Journal of Swimming Research, 6(4), 5–8.
PAGES 80–81
4. R. Havriluk (2011) “An expanded cycle improves swimming 1. R. Havriluk (2016). Approaching Perfect Freestyle + Science. 6. F. J. Nugent, T. M. Comyns, E. Burrows, and G. D. Warrington
technique,” Swimming in Australia, 27(4), 30–32. Tallahassee, FL: Swimming Technology Research. (2017) “Effects of low-volume, high-intensity training on
performance in competitive swimmers: a systematic review,”
PAGES 74–75 2. L. Seifert, H. M. Toussaint, M. Alberty, C. Schnitzler, and D.
The Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 31(3),
1. M. Gladwell (2008) Outliers: The story of success. London, Chollet (2010) “Arm coordination, power, and swim efficiency in
837–847.
UK: Hachette. national and regional front crawl swimmers,” Human Movement
2. K. A. Ericsson, R. T. Krampe, C. and Tesch-Römer (1993) Science, 29(3), 426–439. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2009.11.003 7. L. Pugliese, S. Porcelli, M. Bonato, G. Pavei, A. La Torre,
M. A. Maggioni, G. Bellistri, and M. Marzorati (2015) “Effects
“The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert PAGES 82–83
of manipulating volume and intensity training in masters
performance,” Psychological Review, 100(3), 363. 1. B. Rushall (2016) “Interval training, high-intensity interval
swimmers,” International Journal of Sports Physiology and
3. R. Havriluk, K. A. Ericsson, R. Braun, M. Weaver, and J. training, and USRPT,” Swimming Science Bulletin, 55, 1–21. Performance, 10(7), 907–912.
Mason (2016) “Competitive swimmer expertise in technique PAGES 84–85 8. B. Sperlich, C. Zinner, I. Heilemann, P. L. Kjendlie, H. C.
and conditioning: Strategies to deliberately practice while 1. P. G. Morouço, D. A. Marinho, N. M . Amaro, J. A. Pérez Holmberg, and J. Mester (2010) “High-intensity interval training
traditionally training,” in preparation. Turpin, and M. C. Marques (2012) “Effects of dry-land strength improves VO2peak, maximal lactate accumulation, time trial and
4. J. Baker and B. Young (2014) “20 years later: Deliberate training on swimming performance: a brief review”. Spain, competition performance in 9–11-year-old swimmers.”
practice and the development of expertise in sport,” International Alicante: Universidad de Alicante Área de Educación Física y European Journal of Applied Physiology, 110(5), 1029–1036.
Review of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 7(1), 135–157. Deporte. Available at: http://hdl.handle.net/10045/23621.
PAGES 90–91
5. R. Richards (1999) “Talent identification and development,” 2. T. Bompa and C. Buzzichelli (2015) Periodization Training
1. K. A. Ericsson, R. T. Krampe, and C. Tesch-Römer (1993)
Paper presented at the Australian Swim Coaches and Teachers for Sports, Third Edition. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
“The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert
Association Convention, 1999. 3. T. D. Fahey (1998) “Adaptation to exercise: progressive performance,” Psychological Review, 100(3), 363.
6. M. Lang and R. Light (2010) “Interpreting and implementing resistance exercise,” in T. D. Fahey (ed) Encyclopedia of Sports
2. M. J. Matthews, D. Green, H. Matthews, and E. Swanwick
the long-term athlete development model: English swimming Medicine and Science, Internet Society for Sport Science.
(2017) “The effects of swimming fatigue on shoulder strength,
coaches’ views on the (swimming) LTAD in practice,” Available at: www.sportsci.org/encyc/
range of motion, joint control, and performance in swimmers,”
International Journal of Sports Science and Coaching, 5(3), 4. T. Moritani and H. A. deVries (1979) “Neural factors versus Physical Therapy in Sport, 23, 118–122.
389–402. hypertrophy in the time course of muscle strength gain,”
PAGES 92–93
7. S. Seiler and E. Tønnessen (2009) “Intervals, thresholds, American Journal of Physical Medicine, 58(3), 115–130.
1. F. A. Rodríguez (2010) “Training at real and simulated altitude
and long slow distance: The role of intensity and duration in
PAGES 86–87 in swimming: too high expectations?” in P-L. Kjendlie, R. K.
endurance training,” Sportscience, 13, 32–53. Available at
1. N. F. Matos, R. J. Winsley, and C. A. Williams (2011) Stallman, and J. Cabri (eds), Biomechanics and Medicine in
sportsci.org/2009/ss.htm
“Prevalence of nonfunctional overreaching/overtraining in young Swimming XI. Oslo, Norway: Norwegian School of Sport Science.
8. R. Havriluk (2004) “Hand force and swimming velocity”, English athletes,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise,
2. F. A. Rodríguez, X. Iglesias, B. Feriche, C. Calderón-Soto, D.
paper presented at the XVth Federation Internationale de 43(7), 1287–1294.
Chaverri, N. B. Wachsmuth, W. Schmidt, and B. D. Levine (2015)
Natation World Congress, Indianapolis.
2. R. Havriluk (2013) “Seasonal variations in swimming force “Altitude training in elite swimmers for sea level performance
PAGES 76–77 and training adaptation,” Journal of Swimming Research, 21(1). (Altitude project),” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise,
1. Swimming World (2010) “Industry News: New Hand Paddle 3. R. Winsley and N. Matos (2010) “Overtraining and elite young 47(9), 1965–1978.
Design Provides Strength Training Advantage for Swimmers,” athletes,” in The Elite Young Athlete (Volume 56). Basel,
available at: www.swimmingworldmagazine.com/news/ Switzerland: Karger Publishers (pp. 97–105). CHAPTER 4 dryland training
industry-news-new-hand-paddle-design-provides-strength-
training-advantage-for-swimmers 4. D. L. Costill, M. G. Flynn, J. P. Kirwan, J. A. Houmard, J. B. PAGES 98–99
Mitchell, R. Thomas, and S. H. Park (1988) “Effects of repeated 1. B. R. Rønnestad and I. Mujika (2014) “Optimizing strength
PAGES 78–79 days of intensified training on muscle glycogen and swimming training for running and cycling endurance performance: A
1. M. Stott (2012) “The case for volume,” Swimming World, performance,” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, review,” Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and Science in
53(2), 26–27. 20(3), 249–254. Sports, 24(4), 603–12.
2. G. Troy (2014) Notes from Gregg Troy ASCA Lecture 5. J. E. Counsilman (1968) The Science of Swimming. 2. P. Aagaard and T. Raastad (2012) “Strength training for
(“Garbage Yards and Other Things that Work”): Part I, available Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. endurance performance,” in I. Mujika (ed), Endurance training
at: www.swimmingscience.net/notes-gregg-troy-asca-lecture- – Science and Practice. Vitoria-Gasteiz, Basque Country, Spain,
PAGES 88–89
garbage-yards-things-work-part/ pp. 51–59.
1. W. Goldsmith (2016) “The distance debate: How much
3. D. Salo (2015) “Swim like the cheetah runs,” swim training should we be doing?” Available at: 3. S. Trappe and D. Pearson (1994) “Effects of weight assisted
American Swimming Magazine, 2015(4), 6–18. www.swimmingworldmagazine.com/news/swim-training/ dry-land strength training on swimming performance,” Journal
4. B. Rushall (2016) “Step-by-step USRPT planning and 2. B. Termin and D. R. Pendergast (2000) “Training using the of Strength and Conditioning Research, 8(4), 209–213.
decision-making processes,” available at: http://coachsci.sdsu. stroke frequency–velocity relationship to combine 4. D. Strass (1986) “Effects of maximal strength training
edu/swim/bullets/47GUIDE.pdf biomechanical and metabolic paradigms,” Journal of Swimming on sprint performance of competitive swimmers,” in B. E.
5. R. Havriluk, T. Becker, J. Miller, and S. Rodeo (2012) Research, 14, 9–17. Ungerechts, K. Wilke, and K. Reischle (eds) Vth International
“Medical concerns of mega-yardage training: strategies 3. M. J. Truijens, H. M. Toussaint, J. Dow, and B. D. Levine (2003) Symposium of Biomechanics and Medicine in Swimming, 1986
to prevent and rehabilitate shoulder injury,” available at: “Effect of high-intensity hypoxic training on sea-level swimming Jul 27–31. Bielefeld, Germany: Human Kinetics Books, pp.
www.swimmingworldmagazine.com/news/medical-concerns- performances,” Journal of Applied Physiology, 94(2), 733–743. 149–156.
of-mega-yardage-training-strategies-to-prevent-and- 5. S. Girold, D. Maurin, B. Dugué, J. C. Chatard, and G. Millet
4. I. Mujika, J. C. Chatard, T. Busso, A. Geyssant, F. Barale, and L.
rehabilitate-shoulder-injury (2007) “Effects of dry-land vs. resisted- and assisted-sprint
Lacoste (1995) “Effects of training on performance in
6. R. Havriluk and J. Stager (2012) “Scientific basis competitive swimming,” Canadian Journal of Applied Physiology, exercises on swimming sprint performances,” Journal of
and benefits of reduced training distance,” available at: 20(4), 395–406. Strength and Conditioning Research, 21(2), 599–605.
182 Notes

--- Page 184 Text ---
PAGES 100–101 2. W. C. McMaster, A. Roberts, and T. Stoddard (1998) codes and MET intensities,” Medicine and Science in Sports
1. P. Cormie, M. R. McGuigan, and R. U. Newton (2011) “A correlation between shoulder laxity and interfering pain in and Exercise, 32(9), S498–S51. doi: 10.1097/00005768-
“Developing Maximal Neuromuscular Power, Part 2—Training competitive swimmers,” American Journal of Sports Medicine, 200009001-00009.
Considerations for Improving Maximal Power Production,” 26(1), 83–86. 2. D. R. Pendergast (1988) “The effect of body cooling on
Sports Medicine, 41(2), 125–146. doi: 10.2165/11538500- 3. E. E. Hibberd, S. Oyama, J. T. Sprang, W. Prentice, and oxygen transport during exercise,” Medicine and Science
000000000-00000. J. B. Myers (2012) “Effect of a 6-week strengthening program in Sports and Exercise, 20(5 Suppl), S171–176.
PAGES 102–103 on shoulder and scapular-stabilizer strength and scapular 3. F. Riera, R. Hoyt, X. Xu, B. Melin, J. Regnard, and L. Bourdon
1. M. Weston, A. E. Hibbs, K. G. Thompson, and I. R. Spears kinematics in division I collegiate swimmers,” Journal of Sport (2014) “Thermal and Metabolic Responses of Military Divers
(2015) “Isolated core training improves sprint performance in Rehabilitation, 21, 253–265. During a 6-Hour Static Dive in Cold Water,” Aviation, Space,
national-level junior swimmers”, International Journal of Sports PAGES 116–117 and Environmental Medicine, 85(5), 509–517.
Physiology and Performance, 10(2), 204–210. 1. F. Ogita and S. Taniguchi (1995) “The comparison of peak 4. J. A. King, L. K. Wasse, and D. J. Stensel (2011) “The Acute
PAGES 106–107 oxygen uptake between swim-bench exercise and arm stroke,” Effects of Swimming on Appetite, Food Intake, and Plasma
1. D. C. Bishop, R. J. Smith, M. F. Smith, and H. E. Rigby (2009) European Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Acylated Ghrelin,” Journal of Obesity, 2011, Article ID 351628.
“Effect of plyometric training on swimming block start Physiology, 71(4), 295–300. doi: 10.1155/2011/351628
performance in adolescents,” Journal of Strength Conditioning 2. I. L. Swaine (1997) “Time course of changes in bilateral arm PAGES 128–129
Research, 23(7), 2137–2143. power of swimmers during recovery from injury using a swim 1. I. Y. Kim, S. Schutzler, A. Schrader, H. Spencer, P. Kortebein,
2. J. M. Cossor, B. A. Blanksby, and B. C. Elliott (1999) “The bench,” British Journal of Sports Medicine, 31(3), 213–216. N. E. Deutz, R. R. Wolfe, and A. A. Ferrando (2015) ‘Quantity
influence of plyometric training on the freestyle tumble turn,” 3. J. R. Sexsmith, M. L. Oliver, and J. M. Johnson-Bos (1992) of dietary protein intake, but not pattern of intake, affects
Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 2(2), 106–116. “Acute responses to surgical tubing and biokinetic swim bench net protein balance primarily through differences in protein
3. F. J. Potdevin, M. E. Alberty, A. Chevutschi, P. Pelayo, and interval exercise,” Journal of Swimming Research, 8, 5–10. synthesis in older adults,’ American Journal of Physiology,
M. C. Sidney (2011) “Effects of a 6-week plyometric training Endocrinology and Metabolism, Jan 1, 308 (1) E21–8. doi:
PAGES 118–119
program on performances in pubescent swimmers,” Journal 1. T. Zochowski, E. Johnson, and G. G. Sleivert (2007) “Effects 10.1152/ajpendo.00382.2014. Epub 2014 Oct 28. Also
of Strength Conditioning Research, 25(1), 80–86. of varying post-warm-up recovery time on 200-m time-trial available at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25352437.
PAGES 108–109 swim performance,” International Journal of Sports Physiology 2. O. C. Witard, S. R. Jackman, L. Breen, K. Smith, A. Selby,
1. B. Falk and A. Eliakim (2003) “Resistance training, skeletal and Performance, 2(2), 201–211. and K. D. Tipton (2014) ‘Myofibrillar muscle protein synthesis
muscle and growth,” Pediatric Endocrinology Reviews, 1(2), 2. D. J. West, B. M. Dietzig, R. M. Bracken, D. J. Cunningham, rates subsequent to a meal in response to increasing doses
120–127. B. T. Crewther, C. J. Cook, and L. P. Kilduff (2013) “Influence of whey protein at rest and after resistance exercise,’
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 99 (1) 86–95. doi:
2. A. D. Faigenbaum, W. J. Kraemer, C. J. Blimkie, I. Jeffreys, L. of post-warm-up recovery time on swim performance in
10.3945/ajcn.112.055517. Epub 2013 Nov 20. Also
J. Micheli, M. Nitka, and T. W. Rowland (2009) “Youth resistance international swimmers,” Journal of Science and Medicine in
available at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24257722.
training: updated position statement paper from the national Sport, 16(2), 172–176. doi: 10.1016/j.jsams.2012.06.002.
strength and conditioning association,” Journal of Strength Epub 2012 Jul 11. 3. D. R. Moore, M. J. Robinson, J. L. Fry, J. E. Tang, E. I. Glover,
and Conditioning Research, 23(5 Suppl), S60–79. 3. L. P. Kilduff, D. J. Cunningham, N. J. Owen, D. J. West , S. B. Wilkinson, T. Prior, M. A. Tarnopolsky, and S. M. Phillips
(2009) ‘Ingested protein dose response of muscle and albumin
3. J. Sadowski, A. Mastalerz, W. Gromisz, and T. NiŸnikowski R. M. Bracken, and C. J. Cook (2011) “Effect of postactivation
protein synthesis after resistance exercise in young men,’ The
(2012) “Effectiveness of the power dry-land training potentiation on swimming starts in international sprint
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 89, 161–8. doi: 10.3945/
programmes in youth swimmers,” Journal of Human Kinetics, swimmers,” Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research,
ajcn.2008.26401. Epub 2008 Dec 3. Also available at:
32, 77–86. doi: 10.2478/v10078-012-0025-5. 25(9), 2418–2423.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19056590
4. N. C. Romney, and V. M. Nethery (1993) “The effects of
PAGES 112–113 4. Graphs constructed using Muscle Synthesis Graph web-tool
1. M. Slimani, D. Tod, H. Chaabene, B. Miarka, and K. Chamari swimming and dryland warm-ups on 100-yard freestyle available at www.iMadgenNutrition.com.
(2016) “Effects of mental imagery on muscular strength in performance in collegiate swimmers,” The Journal of Swimming
healthy and patient participants: a systematic review,” Journal Research, 9, 5–9. PAGES 130–131
of Sports Science and Medicine, 15(3), 434–450. PAGES 120–121 1. T. Stellingwerff, L. L. Spriet, M. J. Watt, N. E. Kimber, M.
Hargreaves, J. A. Hawley, L. M. Burke (2006) ‘Decreased PDH
2. P. Post, S. Muncie, and D. Simpson (2011) “The effects of 1. T. L. Rupp, N. J. Wesensten, P. D. Bliese, and T. J. Balkin
activation and glycogenolysis during exercise following fat
imagery training on swimming performance: an applied (2009) “Banking sleep: realization of benefits during subsequent
adaptation with carbohydrate restoration,’ American Journal
investigation,” Journal of Applied Sports Psychology, 12(3), sleep restriction and recovery,” Sleep, 32(3), 311–321.
of Physiology – Endocrinology and Metabolism, 290 (2)
323–337.
PAGES 122–123 E380–E388. Doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00268.2005
3. A. Guillot, F. Di Rienzo, V. Pialoux, G. Simon, S. Skinner, and 1. J. Robineau, N. Babault, J. Piscione, M. Lacome, and A-X.
2. A. E. Jeukendrup (2003) ‘High-carbohydrate versus high-fat
I. Rogowski (2015) “Implementation of motor imagery during Bigard (2016) “The specific training effects of concurrent
diets in endurance sports,’ Schweizerische Zeitschrift für
specific aerobic training session in young tennis players,” aerobic and strength exercises depends on recovery duration,”
Sportmedizin und Sporttraumatologie, 51 (1), 17–23. Also
PLoS One, 10(11) :e0143331. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 30(3),
available at: [http://www.sgsm.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/
4. Z. Huang, H. H. Davis IV, Q. Yue, C. Wiebking, N. W. Duncan, 672–683. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000000798. Zeitschrift/51-2003-1/05-2003-1.pdf
J. Zhang, N. F. Wagner, A. Wolff, and G. Northoff (2015) “Increase 2. J. Haycraft and S. Robertson (2015) “The effects of
PAGES 132–133
in glutamate/glutamine concentration in the medial prefrontal concurrent aerobic training and maximal strength, power and
1. Institute of Medicine (2011) “Dietary Reference Intakes
cortex during mental imagery: a combined functional MRS and swim-specific dry-land training methods on swim performance:
(DRIs): Recommended Dietary Allowances and Adequate
fMRI study,” Human Brain Mapping, 36(8), 3204–3212. a review,” Journal of Australian Strength and Conditioning,
Intakes, Vitamins,” Available at: www.nationalacademies.org/
23(2), 91–99.
PAGES 114–115 hmd/Activities/Nutrition/SummaryDRIs/DRI-Tables.aspx
1. K.M. Sullivan, D.B. Silvey, D.C. Button, and D.G. Behm (2013)
CHAPTER 5 nutrition 2. P. P. Geerligs, B. Brabin, A. Mkumbwa, R. Broadhead, and
“Roller-massager application to the hamstrings increases
L. E. Cuevas (2003) “The effect on haemoglobin of the use
sit-and-reach range of motion within five to ten seconds without PAGES 126–127 of iron cooking pots in rural Malawian households in an area
performance impairments,” International Journal of Sports 1. B. E. Ainsworth, W. L. Haskell, M. C. Whitt-Glover, and A. Leon with high malaria prevalence: a randomized trial,” Tropical
Physical Therapy, 8(3), 228–236. (2000) “Compendium of Physical Activities: an update of activity
183

--- Page 185 Text ---
Medicine and International Health, 8(4), 310–315 2. K. Collomp, S. Ahmaidi, J. C. Chatard, M. Audran, C. Préfaut of Sport Medicine, 21(2), 109–113. doi: 10.1097/
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.2003.01023.x (1992) “Benefits of caffeine ingestion on sprint performance in JSM.0b013e3182041de0
3. G. Armstrong, C. Dewey, and A. Summerlee (2015) “Iron trained and untrained swimmers,” European Journal of Applied 5. J. D. Borstad (2006) “Resting position variables at the
release from the Lucky Iron FishTM: Safety considerations,” Asia Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 64(4), 377–80. shoulder: evidence to support a posture-impairment
Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 10/14/2015. Available at 3. R. Beaumont, P. Cordery, M. Funnell, S. Mears, L. James and association,” Physical Therapy, 86(4), 549–557.
www.apjcn.org/update/pdf/0000/0/2015-0188/2015-0188-- P. Watson (2017) “Chronic ingestion of a low dose of caffeine
PAGES 162–163
online.pdf induces tolerance to the performance benefits of caffeine,”
1. K. Kaneoka, K. Shimizu, M. Hangai, T. Okuwaki, N. Mamizuka,
Journal of Sports Sciences, 35(19), 1920–1927. doi:
PAGES 134–135 M. Sakane, and N. Ochiai (2007) “Lumbar intervertebral disk
10.1080/02640414.2016.1241421.
1. L. Burke and V. Deakin (2015) Clinical Sports Nutrition, degeneration in elite competitive swimmers: a case control
Fifth edition. Australia: McGraw-Hill Education, pp. 392–393. 4. L. S. Gonçalves, V. S. Painelli, G. Yamaguchi, L. F. Oliveira, B. study,” American Journal of Sports Medicine, 35(8),
2. N. A. Masento, M. Golightly, D. T. Field, L. T. Butler, and C. M. Saunders, R. P. da Silva, E. Maciel, G. G. Artioli, H. Roschel and 1341–1345.
B. Gualano (2017) “Dispelling the myth that habitual caffeine
van Reekum (2014) “Effects of hydration status on cognitive PAGES 164–165
consumption influences the performance response to acute
performance and mood,” British Journal of Nutrition, 111(10), 1. S. McGill (2015) Low Back Disorders: Evidence-Based
caffeine supplementation,” Journal of Applied Physiology,
1841–1852. doi: 10.1017/S0007114513004455. Prevention and Rehabilitation, Third Edition. Champaign, IL:
123(1), 213–220. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00260.2017.
3. J. D. Adams, S. A. Kavouras, J. I. Robillard, C. N.Bardis, E. C. Human Kinetics.
5. K. J. Conway, R. Orr, and S. R. Stannard (2003) “Effect
Johnson, M. S. Ganio, B. P. McDermott, and M. A. White (2016)
of a divided caffeine dose on endurance cycling performance, PAGES 168–169
“Fluid Balance of Adolescent Swimmers During Training,” Journal postexercise urinary caffeine concentration, and plasma 1. S. D. Stulberg, K. Shulman, S. Stuart, and P. Culp (1980)
of Strength and Conditioning Research, 30(3), 621–625. paraxanthine,” Journal of Applied Physiology, 94(4), “Breaststroker’s knee: pathology, etiology, and treatment,”
4. A. Jeukendrup and M. Gleeson (2009) Sport Nutrition, An 1557–1562. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00911.2002. American Journal of Sports Medicine, 8(3), 164–171.
Introduction to Energy Production and Performance, 2nd Edition. 6. L. Burke and V. Deakin (2015) Clinical Sports Nutrition, 2. P. Vizsolyi, J. Taunton, G. Robertson, L. Filsinger, H.S.
Human Kinetics. Fifth edition. Australia: McGraw-Hill Education, pp. 517–518. Shannon, D. Whittingham, and M. Gleave (1987)
PAGES 136–137 “Breaststroker’s knee. An analysis of epidemiological and
1. L. Burke and V. Deakin (2015) Clinical Sports Nutrition, Fifth PAGES 144–145 biomechanical factors,” American Journal of Sports Medicine,
edition. Australia: McGraw-Hill Education, pp. 355–356, 670. 1. L. Burke and V. Deakin (2015) Clinical Sports Nutrition, 15(1), 63–71.
Fifth edition. Australia: McGraw-Hill Education.
PAGES 138–139 PAGES 170–171
1. E. F. Coyle and S. J. Montain (1992) “Carbohydrate and fluid PAGES 146–147 1. L. J. Distefano, J. T. Blackburn, S. W. Marshall, and D. A.
ingestion during exercise: Are there trade-offs?” Medicine and 1. J. Antonio, D. Kalman, J. R. Stout, M. Greenwood, D. S. Padua (2009) “Gluteal muscle activation during common
Science in Sports and Exercise, 24(6), 671–678. Willoughby, and G.G. Haff (Eds) (2014) Essentials of Sports therapeutic exercises,” Journal of Orthopedic and Sports
Nutrition and Supplements (2008 Edition). New York City, USA: Physical Therapy, 39(7), 532–540. doi: 10.2519/
2. R. Murray, W. Bartoli, J. Stofan, M. Horn, and D. Eddy (1999) Humana Press, pp. 470–471. jospt.2009.2796
“A comparison of the gastric emptying characteristics of
2. J. Antonio, D. Kalman, J. R. Stout, M. Greenwood, D. S.
selected sports drinks,” International Journal of Sports Nutrition, PAGES 176–177
Willoughby, and G.G. Haff (Eds) (2014) Essentials of Sports
9(3), 263–274. 1. M. Schwellnus (2009) “Cause of exercise-associated muscle
Nutrition and Supplements (2008 Edition). New York City, USA:
3. R. Koopman, D. L. E. Pannemans, A. E. Jeukendrup, A. P. Humana Press, p. 506. cramps (EAMC) – altered neuromuscular control, dehydration or
Gijsen, J. M. G. Senden, D. Halliday, W. H. M. Saris, L. J. C. van electrolyte depletion?” British Journal of Sports Medicine, 43(6),
Loon, and A. J. M. Wagenmakers (2004) “Combined ingestion PAGES 150-151 401–408.
of protein and carbohydrate improves protein balance during R. J. Maughan, L. A. Dargavel, R. Hares, and S. M. Shirreffs 2. M. Schwellnus, N. Drew, and M. Collins (2011) “Increased
ultra-endurance exercise,” American Journal of Physiology (2009) “Water and salt balance of well-trained swimmers in running speed and previous cramps rather than dehydration or
– Endocrinology and Metabolism, 287(4) E712–E720. doi: training,” International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise serum sodium changes predict exercise-associated muscle
10.1152/ajpendo.00543.2003 Metabolism, 19(6), 598–606. doi: 10.1123/ijsnem.19.6.598. cramping: a prospective cohort study in 210 Ironman
Triathletes,” British Journal of Sports Medicine, 45(8), 650–656.
PAGES 140–141 CHAPTER 6 injury prevention
doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2010.078535
1. J. Bohé, J. F. A. Low, R. R. Wolfe, and M. J. Rennie (2001)
and rehabilitation
“Latency and duration of stimulation of human muscle protein 3. K. W. Braulick, K. C. Miller, J. M. Albrecht, J. M. Tucker, and
synthesis during continuous infusion of amino acids,” The PAGES 156–157 J. E. Deal (2013) “Significant and serious dehydration does
Journal of Physiology, 532(2), 575–579. doi: 1. E. E. Hibberd and J. B. Myers (2013) “Practice Habits and not affect skeletal muscle cramp threshold frequency,” British
10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.0575f.x. Attitudes and Behaviors Concerning Shoulder Pain in High Journal of Sports Medicine, 47(11), 710–714. doi: 10.1136/
2. L. Burke and G. Cox (2010) The Complete Guide to Food for School Competitive Club Swimmers”, Clinical Journal of Sport bjsports-2012-091501
Sports Performance: Peak Nutrition for Your Sport, Third Edition. Medicine, 23(6), 450–455. doi: 10.1097/ 4. S. I. Manjra, M. P. Schwellnus, and T. D. Noakes (1996)
Sydney, Australia: Allen & Unwin Publishers. JSM.0b013e31829aa8ff “Risk factors for exercise associated muscle cramping (EAMC)
3. M. Burke, G. R. Collier, and M. Hargreaves (1993) “Muscle 2. S. A. Rodeo, J. T. Nguyen, J. T. Cavanaugh, Y. Patel, and in marathon runners,” Medicine and Science in Sports and
glycogen storage after prolonged exercise: Effect of the R. S. Adler (2016) “Clinical and Ultrasonographic Evaluations Exercise, 28, S167.
glycemic index of carbohydrate feedings,” Journal of Applied of the Shoulders of Elite Swimmers,” American Journal of
Physiology, 75(2), 1019–23. Sports Medicine, 44(12), 3214–3221. doi:
10.1177/0363546516657823
PAGES 142–143
3. E. G. MacFarland, and M. Wasik (1996) “Injuries in female
1. E. R. Goldstein, T. Ziegenfuss, D. Kalman, R. Kreider, B.
collegiate swimmers due to swimming and cross training,”
Campbell, C. Wilborn, L. Taylor, D. Willoughby, J. Stout, B. S.
Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 6(3), 178–182.
Graves, R. Wildman, J. L. Ivy, M. Spano, A. E. Smith and J.
Antonio (2010) “International Society of Sports Nutrition position 4. P. H. Madsen, K. Bak, S. Jensen, and U. Welter (2011)
stand: caffeine and performance,” Journal of the International “Training induces scapular dyskinesis in pain-free competitive
Society of Sports Nutrition, 7:5, doi: 10.1186/1550-2783-7-5 swimmers: a reliability and observational study,” Clinical Journal
184 Notes

--- Page 186 Text ---
Glossary
abduction Movement of a structure away anthropometry The scientific study of catalyst A substance that enables a
from the mid-line of the body. For measurements and proportions of the chemical reaction to proceed at a faster
example, raising an arm laterally involves human body. From the Greek anthropos rate than would otherwise be possible,
abduction at the shoulder. (man) and metron (measure). and which is not used up in the reaction.
active drag The drag, or resistance, on blood–brain barrier Semi-permeable catch-up stroke Freestyle stroke pattern
the body as the limbs actively propel a membrane separating the circulating for which the index of coordination (IdC)
swimmer through the water. blood from the fluid surrounding the brain is negative—the pulling (entry) arm
and central nervous system. It is highly remains outstretched and motionless
adaptation Physiological changes that
selective, allowing only certain molecules in front of the body while the opposite
occur over time in response to exercise
to pass, so it keeps the nervous system arm exits the water and begins the
exceeding a minimum threshold intensity.
in a constant environment. recovery.
adduction Movement of a structure
bone mineral density (BMD) A measure of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) A
toward the mid-line of the body. For
the density of minerals such as calcium in branch of fluid mechanics that uses
example, lowering a laterally raised arm
the bones, used as an indicator of bone computer-based numerical analysis to
involves adduction at the shoulder.
health—low bone density is associated simulate the interactions of liquids and
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) A with osteoporosis and greater risk of gases with surfaces moving relative to
compound containing three phosphates bone fracture. them. It allows us to visualize how a
that is the basic energy currency in fluid flows around a body, and to quantify
biomechanics The study of movement
human body cells. When a phosphate is key parameters such as drag and
of parts of the body.
cleaved from ATP, adenosine diphosphate propulsive forces.
(ADP) is formed, and energy is released. boundary layer The layer of fluid close to
concentric contraction A type of muscle
the surface of a moving object, where the
amino acids Organic compounds that fiber activation in which the tension on
effects of viscosity are significant—this
join together to make up proteins. a muscle increases as it shortens. An
layer effectively ‘sticks’ to the surface and
They form short polymer chains example is the shortening of the biceps
travels at the same speed as the object.
called peptides or longer chains called when lifting a hand weight in a curl.
polypeptides or proteins. buffer A solution that resists changes
creatine phosphate (CP) A rapidly usable
in hydrogen ion concentrations, key to
amortization The short phase between the reserve of high-energy phosphates in
maintaining stable conditions in biological
concentric and eccentric phases of the muscle tissue and in the brain, used
systems. When there are too many
stretch-shortening cycle in a plyometric to re-form ATP (the energy currency of
hydrogen ions, a buffer absorbs some;
exercise. If it lasts too long, energy stored the cell) from ADP, and thus sustaining
when there are too few, it donates some.
in the eccentric phase dissipates, and the maximal output until it becomes
plyometric effect is lost. capillarization The formation of a depleted. Also called phosphocreatine.
capillary network in a part of the body.
anabolism The metabolic processes in deliberate practice Purposeful and
Capillarization in muscles increases in
living organisms that use energy to build systematic practice, requiring focused
response to regular aerobic exercise
large, complex molecules by combining attention rather than just frequent
and improves aerobic performance by
smaller, simpler ones. repetition, and conducted with the
enhancing oxygen delivery.
specific intention of mastering skills.
angle of attack The angle between the
catabolism The metabolic processes
plane of the hand and the direction drafting (slipstreaming) A technique
that break down complex molecules in
of water flow relative to it as it moves in which a swimmer lines up in the
living organisms to form simpler ones,
during the stroke. The ratio of lift and lower-pressure “suction” region of the
releasing energy.
drag forces on the hand depend on slipstream behind another swimmer,
the angle of attack. thereby reducing the effect of drag and
185

--- Page 187 Text ---
the energy needed to maintain speed. fascia A tough, thin, elastic connective Golgi organ A sensory receptor organ
It can also slightly reduce the energy tissue that wraps, supports and protects in the tendons of skeletal muscle that
expenditure of the lead swimmer. most structures in the human body, senses changes in muscle tension, and
including muscle. It is thought that fascia sends impulses to the central nervous
drag coefficient, Cd A dimensionless
tissue can become restricted through system along sensory neurons.
quantity used to quantify the drag or
overuse, trauma, infection or inactivity,
resistance of an object moving in a fluid. ground reaction force The upward force
potentially causing pain, muscle tension,
A lower drag coefficient indicates that exerted by the ground, usually through
and diminished blood flow.
the object will have less drag. the foot, that counteracts the downward
fat-adapted metabolism The ability of the force of the weight of the body.
eccentric contraction A type of muscle
body to oxidize fat at a high rate during
fiber activation in which fibers lengthen hand force The resultant propulsive force
exercise, in preference to burning glucose
while under tension. An example is generated by the hand during the stroke
via glycolysis.
the lengthening of the biceps while cycle. It is directly proportional to the
gently setting down a heavy weight. fibrosis Excess fibrous connective tissue swimming velocity squared—the greater
The maximum tension during eccentric in a tissue, such as muscle, deposited the hand force, the faster the swimming
contraction is greater than during during healing processes. velocity.
concentric contraction—you can set
flume A swimming flume is the equivalent hand pitch angle The angle formed
down a heavier weight than you can lift.
of an aquatic treadmill. A swimmer stays between the palm of the hand and the
effect size A simple way of quantifying in the same horizontal position while direction of the hand’s path through
the difference between two groups, swimming against a current. the water.
which gives a measure of the strength
friction drag Drag caused by the friction hepcidin A hormone made by the liver,
of a phenomenon—a larger absolute
of a fluid against the surface of an which regulates the entry of iron into the
value always indicates a stronger effect
object moving relative to it. Friction blood. When hepcidin levels are high,
(that is, a bigger difference).
drag is directly proportional to the less iron is absorbed in the gut, and
electrolyte A substance whose particles object’s surface area, and proportional more is trapped in liver cells, for example,
have an electrical charge, or the potential to its velocity squared. Also called so blood iron falls.
for a charge. Electrolytes such as viscous drag.
high-intensity training (HIT) A style of
potassium, calcium, phosphate,
frontal (coronal) plane An imaginary progressive training involving brief and
bicarbonate and especially sodium play
vertical plane that divides the body relatively infrequent maximum effort
vital roles in the body, many of which
into front and back, perpendicular to workouts, focusing on small numbers of
are performance related.
the transverse (horizontal) and sagittal quality (heavy weight) repetitions to the
electromyography A technique for planes. point of momentary muscular failure, to
measuring and recording the electrical maximize muscle fiber recruitment.
gliding The motion of a swimmer without
activity of muscles.
propulsion caused by limb or body hull speed The swimming speed at which
ergogenic Able to increase the potential movements—for example, immediately the wavelength of the wave created
for work output, or enhance physical after pushing off the pool wall and before ahead of the swimmer as she moves over
performance, stamina, or recovery. beginning the stroke. The body is as the surface is equal to her body length.
streamlined as possible in order to Swimming at hull speed is economical,
exercise economy The energy required to
minimize drag. but expending energy to swim faster
maintain a constant movement velocity
means wave drag drops significantly and
or generate a specific amount of glycogen A carbohydrate stored in
speed can increase substantially.
power, usually measured as oxygen muscle and liver cells that is easily
consumption per minute. It is an converted to glucose in times of hydrodynamics A branch of fluid
important predictor of endurance metabolic demand. Most of the mechanics that studies the flow of
exercise performance. carbohydrate energy stored in animal liquids, as well as the forces acting on
cells is in the form of glycogen. solid objects immersed in liquids and
moving relative to them.
186 Fundamentals

--- Page 188 Text ---
hydrofoil A solid shape that, when metabolic equivalent of task (MET) The one-repetition maximum (1RM) The
moving relative to a surrounding liquid energy cost (calorie requirement) of a maximum amount of force that can
at a suitable angle of attack, produces physical activity compared to the energy be generated in one maximal muscle
a lift force substantially larger than the expended by a person seated quietly at contraction, or the maximum weight
drag force. rest, which is taken as 1 MET. a person can lift in a single repetition
of an exercise.
hypertrophy Increase in the size of an mitochondrion A round or rod-shaped
organ or tissue, such as muscle, through structure found in large numbers in most passive drag The drag, or resistance,
the enlargement of its component cells animal and plant cells. Mitochondria are on the body when the body is gliding
(rather than through an increase in the regarded as the cell’s “powerhouses” or being towed in the water, with no
number of cells). because they supply energy by action by the limbs.
generating adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
index of coordination (IdC) A way to phagocytosis The process by which a
through cellular respiration.
quantify arm synchronization throughout cell, such as a white blood cell, engulfs
the freestyle stroke cycle, which monocyte The largest type of white blood a solid particle, such as cell debris
expresses three major modalities: cell. At an injury site, monocytes engulf resulting from tissue damage.
opposition (zero IdC, when one arm and destroy damaged cells, pathogens
phosphagen system The predominant
begins the pull as the other finishes the and other debris by phagocytosis. They
system used to provide energy in cells
push phase), catch-up (negative IdC, mature into macrophages, which secrete
for all-out exercise lasting up to about
when there is a lag time between the chemicals that induce tissue regeneration.
10 seconds. The phosphagen system
propulsive phases of the two arms) and
motor neuron A nerve cell forming part of resynthesizes ATP from ADP, using
superposition (positive IdC, when there
a pathway that passes impulses from the creatine phosphate.
is an overlap in the propulsive phases).
central nervous system to an effector organ
plyometric training Exercises and
isometric contraction A muscle fiber such as a muscle, causing a response.
workouts, often involving jumps, in which
activation in which fibers under tension
motor unit A motor neuron along with the muscles exert maximum force over very
do not lengthen or shorten, and no joint
skeletal muscle fibers that it innervates short time intervals, in order to improve
movement occurs. An example is
(stimulates). During a muscle contraction, muscle elastic strength and power,
pushing against a wall. The tension
groups of motor units work together in a particularly in the legs.
applied remains consistent throughout
coordinated way.
the exercise, which can help muscle post-activation potentiation The theory
development. muscle spindle A sensory receptor that the contractile history of a muscle
organ within muscle tissue that detects influences its subsequent mechanical
kinematics Branch of mechanics focusing
changes in the length of the muscle, and performance. For example, performing
on the pure motion of objects and points
sends impulses to the central nervous countermovement jumps beforehand
without consideration of mass and force;
system along sensory neurons. Also has been shown to improve swim start
biomechanics involves the study of the
called a stretch receptor. performance.
movement of parts of the body.
myofascial release A manipulative pressure drag Drag resulting from the
lift The component of the force exerted
treatment that attempts to relieve skeletal pressure difference between the leading
by a fluid flowing around an object that
muscle immobility and pain by releasing and trailing edges of a body moving
is perpendicular to the oncoming flow
tension in the fascia, relaxing contracted through a fluid. Particles move from
direction. (The drag component acts
muscles, improving blood and lymphatic higher pressure at the front toward lower
parallel to the flow direction.)
circulation, and stimulating the stretch pressure at the rear where layers
macronutrient An essential nutrient reflex in muscles. separate from the surface and begin to
required in relatively large amounts for swirl, producing pressure drag opposing
neutrophil The most abundant type of
normal growth and development, the direction of movement. Also called
white blood cells. They form an essential
including fats, carbohydrates, and also called form or profile drag.
part of the immune system, and play an
proteins. Sometimes certain minerals
important role in injury recovery.
are included, such as calcium, chloride,
or sodium.
187

--- Page 189 Text ---
progressive overload The gradual perpendicular to the frontal (coronal) and superposition Freestyle stroke pattern
increase of stress placed upon the body transverse (horizontal) planes. for which the index of coordination (IdC)
during exercise training—by increasing is positive—there is an overlap in the
sensory neuron A nerve cell forming part
resistance, reps, sets or frequency, or propulsive phases of the two arms.
of a pathway that passes impulses from a
by decreasing rest periods—in order to
sense receptor organ, such as a muscle taper A decrease in the workload toward
continually make gains in muscle size,
spindle, to the central nervous system. the end of a training program, to allow
strength, and endurance.
rest and recovery before the main
skeletal muscle A type of muscle that is
proliferation The second phase of injury end-of-season competition.
under voluntary control, usually attached
recovery, after inflammation, during which
to bones by bundles of collagen fibers thrust Thrust is due to steady and
the body starts to repair itself. Specialized
called tendons. (The other muscle types unsteady flow patterns, and is the
cells form new tissues, and the body
are cardiac muscle in the heart, and sum of propulsive drag, lift force,
produces the protein collagen to repair
smooth, involuntary muscle in the gut, and the jet vortex.
damaged structures.
for example.)
total drag The resistive force resulting
propulsive force (propulsive drag) Force
spinal disc herniation A medical condition from three components—friction drag,
resulting from pulling the hand directly
in which damage to the fibrous outer pressure drag (also called form or profile
backward through the water during each
layer of an intervertebral disc in the spine drag), and wave-making drag. Total
stroke cycle, contributing to thrust and
allows the soft inner material to bulge out, drag depends on fluid density, body
forward movement of the swimmer.
causing inflammation and pain. Also surface area and, most importantly,
rate of force development A measure called a slipped disc. swim velocity.
of explosive strength, or how rapidly a
stretch-shortening cycle A cyclical transverse plane Also called the horizontal
muscle or muscle group can develop
muscle action involving an eccentric plane, axial plane, or transaxial plane.
force. This depends on the rate at which
contraction, a brief transitional An imaginary horizontal plane that divides
the contractile elements of the muscle
amortization phase, and then a the body into upper and lower parts,
can engage. A greater rate of force
concentric contraction. The concentric perpendicular to the frontal (coronal)
development means greater power.
phase is more powerful, and does more and sagittal planes.
reflex An involuntary and automatic work, because in the eccentric phase the
ultra-short race-pace training (USRPT)
action in response to a stimulus, stretched muscle stores elastic energy
A swim training program that
occurring without conscious thought, and also activates the muscle spindles,
emphasizes competition speed
mediated by impulses along a neural causing involuntary contraction of
and not total training distance.
pathway called a reflex arc, which otherwise dormant muscle fibers.
does not involve the brain. VO2 max The maximum rate of oxygen
stroke index A measure of a swimmer’s
consumption during intense, or maximal
remodeling (maturation) The final stage stroke efficiency, calculated by multiplying
exercise, (measured in milliliters of
of injury recovery, lasting 2–4 months or average velocity and stroke length (the
oxygen per minute per kilogram of
longer, during which collagen fibers are distance the body travels with each arm
body mass) often used as a measure
laid down in an optimal, orderly fashion, stroke).
of cardiorespiratory fitness and
and full strength and function begins
stroke volume The volume of blood (in endurance capacity.
to return.
liters) pumped from the left ventricle of
wave-making drag Drag resulting from
resultant force The single force that has the heart per beat.
fluid tending to “pile up” at the front of
the same overall effect on a body as a
super-compensatory adaptation The a moving body, while “hollows” form in
combination of individual forces acting
increased fitness and improved the rear, creating waves. Wave-making
on it together.
performance relative to initial baseline drag reflects the energy wasted in
sagittal plane An imaginary vertical plane levels that occurs following a training needing to push the water out of the
that passes from front to back, dividing stimulus (overload), fatigue and a suitable way in swimming.
the body into right and left halves, recovery period, during which stressed
tissue heals and muscle tissue grows.
188 Glossary

--- Page 190 Text ---
Notes on contributors
EDITOR CONTRIBUTORS
Dr. G. John Mullen graduated with a Doctorate in Dr. Tiago M. Barbosa is Assistant Professor at Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS).
Physical Therapy from the University of Southern Nanyang Technological University in Singapore and He has worked with aquatic sport organizations such
California (USC). At USC, John was a research Adjunct Professor at the Polytechnic Institute of as the Toronto Swim Club, Guelph Triathlon Club, and
assistant and worked on projects about physical Braganca in Portugal. He served as Director for Mavericks Waterpolo club. Kevin also lectures at
activity and type II diabetes as well as lung Science and Technology at the Portuguese Swimming Sheridan College in the Fundamentals of Fitness
adaptations in swimmers. He has contributed to Federation. Some of his research interests include Leadership program, teaching courses on nutrition,
Swimming World Magazine, Swimmer Magazine, the modeling of swimming performance, swimming exercise technique, health and wellness, program
The Journal of the International Society of Swim biomechanics, and swimming physiology. He has design, and physical activity in special populations.
Coaches, SportsRehabExpert.com, About.com, and published extensively in a wide variety of topics
STACK Magazine. He is also the founder of the blog related to competitive swimming in top-tier scientific Allan Phillips is a Certified Strength and
Swimming Science, the monthly Swimming Science peer-review journals. Conditioning Specialist and owner of Pike Athletics
Research Review, and the Swimmer’s Shoulder based in San Antonio, Texas. He is also an American
System. He is on the advisory board for the Dr. Rod Havriluk, President, Swimming Technology Swimming Coaches Association Level 2 coach, USA
International Society of Swim Coaches. John consults Research, is a biomechanist who specializes in Triathlon coach, StrongFirst Kettlebell instructor,
for many sports teams about dryland and physical swimming technique instruction and analysis. Rod and Function Movement Screen specialist. Allan
therapy and is the CEO of COR Physical Therapy and has coached swimming at all levels—from age group specializes in working with endurance athletes in
Personal Training in Santa Clara, CA. He swam to NCAA Division I. He serves on the advisory board strength development and injury prevention. His
collegiately at Purdue University and is currently a for the Counsilman Center for the Science of athletes have captured U.S. National Championships
Masters World Record holder. Swimming; the educational committee of the in cycling, track and field, and triathlon, and have
International Swim Coaches Association; the editorial represented the United States at multiple international
board for the Journal of Swimming Research; and the competitions. He has also served as a consultant to
review board of numerous sport science journals. the USA Triathlon’s Collegiate Development Program
Rod’s research focuses on three primary areas: Along with his work in the private sector, Allan has
optimizing technique, preventing shoulder injuries, worked in a variety of human performance
and accelerating skill learning. He has presented his optimization roles with the United States military,
findings at many conferences, published in many including movement analysis, body composition
journals, and conducted clinics in many countries. improvement, and water confidence training for
He has worked with thousands of swimmers and special operations candidates. Allan and Pike
triathletes, including Olympians and world record Athletics are also staunch advocates for disabled
holders. Swimming World Magazine named Rod as athletes and the Paralympic movement. His
one of the top ten people with the greatest impact Paralympic athletes have won multiple national
on swimming in 2015. championships and represented the United States in
several international competitions, including the 2012
Kevin Iwasa-Madge completed his Bachelor’s London Paralympic Games. Allan has written
degree in Applied Human Nutrition at the University extensively in the strength and conditioning field.
of Guelph in Canada. He has also completed training Along with Dr. John Mullen, he coauthored the
at the Canadian Sports Institute of Ontario. While in Swimming Science Troubleshooting System. His
school, Kevin wrestled for the University of Guelph work has also been featured by Swimming Science,
varsity team, winning a national title along the way. SportsRehabExpert.com, StrengthCoach.com,
Following graduation, he competed on the Canadian Functional Movement Systems, Swimmer Magazine,
National Wrestling Team for several years. Kevin is Swim Swam News, The Active Network, and
currently completing a Master’s degree in Nutrition Livestrong. Currently he is pursuing a Doctorate in
Communication at Ryerson University. Professionally, Physical Therapy from South College.
Kevin is a Registered Dietitian (RD), as well as a
189

--- Page 191 Text ---
Index
A breath control 92 creatine phosphate (CP) 144–145, drills 80, 81
abduction 185 drill 80–81 185 energy expenditure 32, 33
active drag 38–39, 58, 185 energy expenditure 32, 33 crunches 102 hand pitch 62
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 144, hand pitch 62, 63 stroke speed 59
185 knee and hip pain 168–169, 170 D technique limitations and 43
aerobic training 122–123 maintaining constant velocity 54, dehydration 134–135 friction drag 14, 15, 18, 186
altitude training 92 55 deliberate practice 70, 71, 72–73,
amino acids 128, 140 stroke speed 59 185 G
see also beta-alanine; histidine technique limitations and 43 distance, optimal for training 78–79, gliding 38–39, 54–55, 186
amortization 106, 185 breath control 92–93 82 glute bridge 165
anabolism 129, 185 butterfly dolphin kicks 17, 35, 36, 84, 163, gluteus muscle strengthening 171
Andrew, Michael 82 and body undulation 50–51 168 glycogen 130–131, 138–139,
anthropometry 185 breath control 92–93 drafting (slipstreaming) 22–23, 185 140–141, 142, 186
arms drill 80–81 drag coefficient 19, 42, 43, 58–59, glycogen depletion 138–139,
elbow flexion 60, 61 energy expenditure 32, 33 186 140–141
gliding position 38–39 hand pitch 62 drag force 14, 15, 18–19, 60–61 Golgi organs 177, 186
index of coordination (IdC) 52–53, maintaining constant velocity 54, drills 80–81 ground reaction force 173, 186
54–55, 187 55 dryland training
ATP (adenosine triphosphate ) 144, stroke speed 58 and children 108–109 H
185 technique limitations 43 measuring 119 hand force 42, 43, 44–45, 60,
and performance 98–101, 64–65, 186
B C 106–107 hand paddles 35, 76–77
back pain caffeine 142–143, 148 hand pitch 62–63, 64, 186
and kickboards 160–161 calorific requirements 126–127 E hands, surface area 30–31
low back pain 162–165 carbohydrates 130–131, 136, eccentric contraction 106, 186 head, gliding position 38–39
low back taping 179 138–139, 140–141, 148 elbow flexion 60, 61 hepcidin 131, 132–133, 186
backstroke carnosine 146–147 electrolytes 150–151, 186 high-intensity training (HIT) 82,
drills 80, 81 capillarization 98, 185 electromyography 174–175, 186 88–89, 186
energy expenditure 32, 33 catabolism 129, 185 energy expenditure 32–33 hip pain 168–171
hand pitch 62 catch-up strokes 52, 53, 54, 67, 80, hip rotation 46–47
stroke speed 58 185 F histidine 146, 147
technique limitations and 43 children and resistance training fat 130–131 hours of practice 74–75
ballistic training 101 108–109 fat-adapted metabolism 131, 186 hull speed 24–25, 186
beta-alanine 146–147 Cielo, Cesar 56 fibrosis 154, 186 hydration 134–135
Biedermann, Paul 26 competitions, propulsion efficiency in finger positions 30–31 hydrofoils 28, 186
biomechanics 185 34–35 finishes 94 hypertrophy 84, 85, 140, 186
bird dog 165 computational fluid dynamics (CFD) fins 35 hypoxic training 92–93
body mass 15 20–21, 185 flexibility training 114–115
body undulation and propulsion cookware, iron 133 force analysis 48–49 I
50–51 core training 102–103, 164–165 form drag see pressure drag index of coordination (IdC) 52–53,
bone mineral density 172–173, 185 Counsilman, Doc 10 free body diagram 14–15 187
breaststroke counter movement jumps 107 freestyle inertial parameters 14, 15
and body undulation 50–51 cramping 176–177 breath control 92, 93 inflammation 154, 155, 178
190 Index

--- Page 192 Text ---
injuries pre-training 136–137 S T
building confidence after 166 protein 128–129, 136, 138, sagittal plane 103, 188 taper 84, 87, 91, 188
physiological processes 154–155 140, 148 Salo, Dave 78 taping 178–179
see also specific areas salt 150–151 salt 150–151 technique limitations and
iron supplements 132–133 see also supplements Schooling, Joseph 37 performance 42–43
isometric contraction 116, 187 season plans 90–91 thrust 14, 15, 188
O shoulder pain 156–159 and hand surface area 30–31
J one-repetition maximum (1RM) 101, and kickboards 160–161 mechanisms for 28–29
jump training see plyometrics 187172–173 shoulder impingement 66–67 thumb positions 30, 31
overtraining 84, 85, 86–87 side bridge 165 torso rotation 46–47
K sit-ups 102 total drag 14, 18–19, 188
kickboards 160–161 P sleep 120–121 transverse plane 103, 188
kinematics 174–175, 187 paddles 35, 76–77 slipstreaming (drafting) 22–23, 185 Troy, Gregg 78
knee pain 168–171 passive drag 38–39, 58, 59, 187 sodium bicarbonate 146–147 TRX training system 98
phagocytosis 154, 187 speed turbulent flow 16, 17
L Phelps, Michael 8, 10, 26 in competitions 34–35 turns 94–95
laminar flow 16, 17 phosphagen system 144–145, 187 hull speed 24–25
leverage 56 physiological adaptations 84–85 and technical limitations 42–43 U
lift force 14, 15, 28, 29, 187 “plank” (prone bridge endurance test) sports taping 178–179 ultra-short race-pace training
102, 103 squat jumps 107 (USRPT) 82, 88, 188
M plyometric training 101, 106–107, starts 94–95, 107 underwater video 48–49
Manaudou, Laure 110 119, 187 streamlining 60–61 upper trapezius, taping 179
maturation (remodeling) 154, 155, post-activation potentiation 118, 187 stretch cords 104–105 “upsweep” 28
173, 188 powders, nutritional 148 stretch-shortening cycle 106, 188
mechanical advantage 56 pressure drag 14, 15, 18, 19, 187 stretches 114–115, 119 V
metabolic acidity 146–147 profile drag see pressure drag stroke volume 84, 85, 188 velocity, maintaining constant 54–55
metabolic equivalent of task (MET) prone bridge endurance test (“plank”) Strouhal numbers 36 video 48–49, 110
127, 187 102, 103 super-compensatory adaptation 85, viscous drag see friction drag
monocytes 154, 187 propulsion 86, 188 visualization 112–113
motor neurons 106, 187 efficiency 34–35 superposition 52, 53, 188 VO2 max 42, 98, 122, 188
myofascial release 114, 171, 187 and hand path 64–65 supplements vortices 14, 15, 18, 28
and resistance 60–61 beta-alanine 146–147
N propulsive drag 14, 15, 28, 29, 188 creatine phosphate 144–145 W
neutrophils 154, 187 protein 128–129, 136, 138, 140, 148 histidine 146, 147 warm-up strategies 118–119
Newton’s laws of motion 15, 28 iron 132–133 water
nutrition R sodium bicarbonate 146–147 adding nutrients to 138–139
calorific requirements 126–127 rate of force development (RFD) 101, suspension training 98 amount to drink 134–135
carbohydrates 130–131, 136, 188 swim benches 116–117 water flow and displacement 16–17
138–139, 140–141, 148 refractometers 135 swimwear 26 wave-making drag 14, 18, 36–37,
during training 138–139 remodeling (maturation) 154, 155, systemic training 70–71 188
elite-level 148 173, 188 “window of adaptation” 101
fat 130–131 Reynolds number 17
post-training 140–141 Rushall, Brent 78, 82
191

--- Page 193 Text ---
Table of measurements
Distance Force Area Abbreviations
1 in = 25.4 mm = 2.54 cm 1 N = 0.225 lb 1 cm2 = 0.155 in2 mm millimeter (0.001 m)
1 cm = 10 mm = 0.394 in 1 lb = 4.448 N 1 in2 = 6.452 cm2 cm centimeter (0.01 m)
1 ft = 0.305 m 1 m2 = 10.764 ft2 m meter
1 yd = 0.914 m Mass 1 ft2 = 0.0929 m2 km kilometer (1000 m)
1 m = 3.281 ft = 1.094 yd 1 g = 0.0357 oz in inch
1 mile = 1.609 km 1 oz = 28.350 g Volume ft foot
1 km = 0.621 mile 1 kg = 1000 g = 2.205 lb 1 liter = 1000 milliliter = 33.81 fl oz = yd yard
1 lb = 453.6 g = 0.454 kg 2.113 US pint = 0.264 US gallon ms millisecond (1000 s)
Speed 1 fl oz = 29.57 milliliter = 0.0296 liter s second
1 m/s = 3.281 ft/s = 2.237 mph = 3.6 km/h Converting between 1 US pint = 0.473 liter h hour
1 km/h = 0.621 mph = 0.911 ft/s = 0.278 m/s mass and weight 1 US gallon = 3.785 liter N newton
1 ft/s = 0.305 m/s = 0.682 mph = 1.097 km/h (on Earth) g gram
1 mph = 1.609 km/h = 1.467 ft/s = 0.447 m/s 1 kg = 2.205 lb = 9.807 N Temperature kg kilogram
1 N = 0.225 lb = 0.102 kg °C = (°F − 32) x 5/9 oz ounce
Acceleration °F = (°C × 9/5) + 32 lb pound
1 m/s2 = 3.281 ft/s2 °C degrees Celsius
1 ft/s2 = 0.305 m/s2 °F degrees Fahrenheit
Acknowledgments
The Ivy Press would like to thank the following for permission to reproduce copyright material:
Raúl Arellano Colomina: 17 center.
Copyright Clearance Center – Rightslink: 29 top. Republished with permission of American Swimming Coaches Association, from: Brent S. Rushall, Laurence E. Holt, Eric J. Sprigings,
Jane M. Cappaert, “A re evaluation of forces in swimming” in The Journal of Swimming Research, Vol. 10, Fall 1994; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
Getty Images: Philippe Desmazes/AFP: 111; Mike Hewitt:153; Francois Xavier Marit/AFP: 57; Ronald Martinez: 83; Tom Pennington: 4–5; Alberto Pizzoli/AFP: 27.
Shutterstock: Paolo Bona: 9; katacarix: 41; itti ratanakiranaworn: 125; sirtravelalot: 167; Syda Productions: 97; TORWAISTUDIO: 13; Suzanne Tucker: 69; wellphoto: 153.
Huub Toussaint: 17 top right.
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders and to obtain their permission for the use of copyright material.
The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions in the lists above and will gratefully incorporate any corrections in future reprints if notified.
192 Acknowledgments