
--- Page 1 Text ---
SWIMMING

--- OCR from Page 1 Image 2 ---
—\
od BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA’

--- OCR from Page 1 Image 6 ---
AVE BEN

--- Page 2 Text ---
How to Use This Pamphlet
The secret to successfully earning a merit badge is for you to use both
the pamphlet and the suggestions of your counselor.
Your counselor can be as important to you as a coach is to an athlete.
Use all of the resources your counselor can make available to you.
This may be the best chance you will have to learn about this particular
subject. Make it count.
If you or your counselor feels that any information in this pamphlet is
incorrect, please let us know. Please state your source of information.
Merit badge pamphlets are reprinted annually and requirements
updated regularly. Your suggestions for improvement are welcome.
Send comments along with a brief statement about yourself to Youth
Development, S209 • Boy Scouts of America • 1325 West Walnut Hill
Lane • P.O. Box 152079 • Irving, TX 75015-2079.
Who Pays for This Pamphlet?
This merit badge pamphlet is one in a series of more than 100 covering
all kinds of hobby and career subjects. It is made available for you
to buy as a service of the national and local councils, Boy Scouts of
America. The costs of the development, writing, and editing of the
merit badge pamphlets are paid for by the Boy Scouts of America in
order to bring you the best book at a reasonable price.

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 40 ---
4

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 63 ---
lar

is

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 64 ---
jar

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 67 ---
covering
r you

its of
the

‘ica in

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 70 ---
covering
r you

its of

the

ica in

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 73 ---
pe eh |

Merit badg
updated re

Send com:
Developm:
Lane ¢ P.O

WHO

TTL. 2 ee et

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 74 ---
Send
Devel
Lane

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 85 ---
se.
his
ibji

Taal

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 87 ---
AVICL I
upde

Le

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 88 ---
Sl

If

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 91 ---
merit b
order t

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 94 ---
ord

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 97 ---
The s
the p.

Your |

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 98 ---
Our

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 102 ---
USE THIS PA)

iccessfully earning a mer
nd the suggestions of you

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 103 ---
USE THIS PA!

aco. | eee 6 rn,

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 107 ---
TT rH
ar counselor.

ou as a coach is to an athlete
can make available to you.

ee es ey ST ar ee

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 110 ---
APE

‘it bac
ar col

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 111 ---
ise both

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 114 ---
LET

lige is for you to v
inselor.

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 115 ---
APT
it bac

wren

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 116 ---
1to use

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 182 ---
wil

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 193 ---
mr

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 199 ---
as

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 203 ---
<0 OE

--- OCR from Page 2 Image 209 ---
Fe

--- Page 3 Text ---
BOY sCOUTs OF AmERiCA
mERiT BADgE sERiEs
swimming

--- Page 4 Text ---
Note to the Counselor
Like other merit badges, the Swimming merit badge has been
developed to teach and train youth in a manner consistent with
the overall goals and values of the Boy Scouts of America. The
merit badge counselor should be fair and consistent and should
present and teach the skills as presented in this pamphlet. None
of the requirements should be omitted, and nothing should be
added to them.
Candidates with an extensive swimming background may
be able to meet all or most of the requirements with little or no
formal instruction from the counselor. Most Scouts, however,
will need instruction prior to completing the requirements.
Scouts may train as a single buddy pair or in small groups.
Training sessions can be on a flexible schedule. Alternatively,
larger groups may train together on a more formal basis at
prearranged times. A counselor may also provide individual
instruction as long as there is another adult or youth present.
Subject to equipment availability and other constraints, each
candidate should have the opportunity to choose which of the
optional requirements he will complete. The “Aquatics” section
of Camp Program and Property Management provides a sug-
gested outline for Swimming merit badge instruction.
The merit badge instruction should begin with a review of
requirement 3. This will lay a suitable foundation for safety and
first aid requirements 1 and 2. This review also will indicate indi-
vidual levels of skill proficiency in various strokes, floating, and
feetfirst entry. Scouts should learn the leaping entry in the first
session. The leaping entry, the preferred entry for the swim tests
used in the Second and First Class rank requirements, should
be taught and emphasized in the first session as a safety skill to
be used throughout the class. The faceup float (requirement 6a)
35957 BANG/Brainerd, MN
ISBN 978-0-8395-3352-8 1-2010/059413
©2008 Boy Scouts of America
2010 Printing

--- Page 5 Text ---
also should be taught in the First Class session as a confidence
builder and as a resting and survival procedure for use during
the class and beyond.
Stroke instruction should begin in the first session and
continue throughout the course. Base individualized instruction
on the proficiency of each participant. Each participant may
be given the opportunity to complete the stroke requirement
(requirement 5) when he appears ready.
Regarding other requirements, Scouts should first master sur-
face dives (requirement 7) before beginning snorkeling and scuba
diving (requirement 8a). They should receive diving instruction
(requirement 9) prior to competitive skills instruction (require-
ment 8b). Survival skills and knowledge (requirements 4, 6b, 6c,
and 6d) can be covered at any time, because they relate closely to
the safety and preliminary skills in requirements 1 and 3.
If Scouts complete requirement 10 concurrently with in-water
skills instruction, then the pertinent information should be
presented early enough in the course to allow time for Scouts
to study and prepare individual exercise program plans.
Requirement 10c must be completed in writing. Requirements
10a, 10b, and 10d may be done orally, but Scouts should not
simply listen to a presentation from the counselor. Each merit
badge candidate must learn the material and demonstrate that
knowledge by explaining the facts or concepts to his counselor.
swimming 3

--- Page 6 Text ---
Requirements
1. Discuss the prevention of and treatment for health concerns
that could occur while swimming, including hypothermia,
dehydration, sunburn, heat exhaustion, heatstroke, muscle
cramps, hyperventilation, spinal injury, stings and bites, and
cuts and scrapes.
2. Do the following:
a. Identify the conditions that must exist before performing
CPR on a person. Explain how to recognize
such conditions.
b. Demonstrate proper technique for performing CPR using
a training device approved by your counselor.
3. Before doing the following requirements, successfully
complete Second Class rank requirements 7a–7c and
First Class rank requirements 9a–9c.
Second Class rank requirements:
(7a) Tell what precautions must be taken for a safe swim.
(7b) Demonstrate your ability to jump feetfirst into
water over your head in depth, level off and swim
25 feet on the surface, stop, turn sharply, resume
swimming, then return to your starting place.
(7c) Demonstrate water rescue methods by reaching
with your arm or leg, by reaching with a suitable
object, and by throwing lines and objects. Explain
why swimming rescues should not be attempted
when a reaching or throwing rescue is possible, and
explain why and how a rescue swimmer should
avoid contact with the victim.
4 swimming

--- Page 7 Text ---
First Class rank requirements:
(9a) Tell what precautions must be taken for a
safe trip afloat.
(9b) Before doing the following requirement,
successfully complete the BSA swimmer test:
Jump feetfirst into water over your head in depth,
swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or more
of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke,
trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy,
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be swum
continuously and include at least one sharp turn.
After completing the swim, rest by floating.
(9c) With a helper and a practice victim, show
a line rescue both as tender and as rescuer.
The practice victim should be approximately
30 feet from shore in deep water.
4. Demonstrate survival skills by jumping feetfirst into deep
water wearing clothes (shoes, socks, swim trunks, long
pants, belt, and long-sleeved shirt). Remove shoes and
socks, inflate the shirt, and show that you can float using
the shirt for support. Remove and inflate the pants. Swim
50 feet using the inflated pants for support, then show how
to reinflate the pants while still afloat.
5. Swim continuously for 150 yards using the following
strokes in good form and in a strong manner:
front crawl or trudgen for 25 yards, back
crawl for 25 yards, sidestroke for 25 yards,
breaststroke for 25 yards, and elementary
backstroke for 50 yards.
6. Do the following:
a. Float faceup in a resting position for at
least one minute.
b. Demonstrate survival floating for at least
five minutes.
c. While wearing a properly fitted personal
flotation device (PFD), demonstrate the HELP
and huddle positions. Explain their purposes.
d. Explain why swimming or survival floating
will hasten the onset of hypothermia in cold water.
swimming 5

--- Page 8 Text ---
7. In water over your head, but not to exceed 10 feet, do each of
the following:
a. Use the feetfirst method of surface diving and bring an
object up from the bottom.
b. Do a headfirst surface dive (pike or tuck), and bring
the object up again.
c. Do a headfirst surface dive to a depth of at least 5 feet
and swim underwater for three strokes. Come to the
surface, take a breath, and repeat the sequence twice.
8. Do ONE of the following:
a. Demonstrate snorkeling and scuba diving knowledge:
(1) Demonstrate selection and fit of mask, snor-
kel, and fins; discuss safety in both pool and
open-water snorkeling.
(2) Demonstrate proper use of mask, snorkel,
and fins for underwater search and rescue.
(3) Describe the sport of scuba diving or snorkel-
ing, and demonstrate your knowledge of BSA
policies and procedures relating to that sport.
OR
b. Demonstrate the following competitive swimming skills:
(1) Racing dive from a pool edge or dock edge
(no elevated dives from racing platforms or
starting blocks)
(2) Racing form for 25 yards on one competitive stroke
(front crawl, back crawl, breaststroke, or butterfly)
(3) Racing turns for the stroke that you chose in 8b(2),
OR, if the camp facilities cannot accommodate the
racing turn, repeat 8b(2) with an additional stroke.
(4) Describe the sport of competitive swimming.

--- Page 9 Text ---
9. Following the guidelines set in the BSA Safe Swim Defense,
in water at least 7 feet deep, show a standing headfirst dive
from a dock or pool deck. Show a long shallow dive, also
from the dock or pool deck.
10. Do the following:
a. Explain the health benefits of regular aerobic exercise,
and explain why many people today do not get enough
of the beneficial kinds of exercise.
b. Discuss why swimming is favored as both a fitness and
a therapeutic exercise.
c. Write a plan for a swimming exercise program that will
promote aerobic/vascular fitness, strength and muscle
tone, body flexibility, and weight control for a person
of Scout age. Identify resources and facilities available
in your home community that would be needed for
such a program.
d. Discuss with your counselor the incentives and obstacles
for staying with the fitness program you identified in
requirement 10c. Explain the unique benefits that could
be gained from this program, and discuss how personal
health awareness and self-discipline would relate to your
own willingness and ability to pursue such a program.
swimming 7

--- Page 11 Text ---
Contents
Safety ......................................... 11
Swimming Skills .................................29
Swimming Strokes ................................35
Surface Dives ...................................49
Snorkeling and Scuba .............................53
Diving .........................................69
Competitive Swimming ............................75
Swimming for Fitness and Health ..................... 91
Swimming Resources ..............................95
swimming 9

--- OCR from Page 12 Image 1 ---
i

--- Page 13 Text ---
.safety
Safety
Developed more than 60 years ago, the procedures included in
the Boy Scouts of America’s water safety plan have earned
Scouting what is believed to be the most commendable water
safety record of any youth organization in the United States.
BsA safe swim Defense
All swimming activity in Scouting is conducted according to
Safe Swim Defense standards. The eight points of Safe Swim
Defense are as follows.
1. Qualified supervision
All swimming activity must be supervised by a
mature and conscientious adult age 21 or
older who understands and knowingly
accepts responsibility for the well-being
and safety of those in his or her care,
and who is trained in and committed
to compliance with the eight points
of BsA safe swim Defense. It is
strongly recommended that all units
have at least one adult or older
youth member currently trained in
BSA Swimming and Water Rescue
or BSA Lifeguard to assist in the
planning and conduct of all
swimming activities.
swimming 11

--- Page 14 Text ---
safety.
2. Personal Health Review
A complete health history is required of all partici-
pants as evidence of fitness for swimming activities.
Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or
legal guardian. Participants should be asked to relate
any recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the
activity. Supervision and protection should be adjusted to
anticipate any potential risks associated with individual
health conditions. For significant health conditions, the
adult supervisor should require an examination by a phy-
sician and consult with the parent, guardian, or caregiver
for appropriate precautions.
3. safe Area
All swimming areas must be carefully inspected and pre-
pared for safety prior to each activity. water depth, quality,
temperature, movement, and clarity are important consider-
ations. Hazards must be eliminated or isolated by conspicu-
ous markings and discussed with participants.
Controlled access. There must be safe areas for all participating
ability groups to enter and leave the water. Swimming areas of
appropriate depth must be defined for each ability group. The
entire area must be within easy reach of designated rescue
personnel. The area must be clear of boat traffic, surfing,
or other nonswimming activities.
Bottom conditions and depth: The bottom must be clear of
trees and debris. Abrupt changes in depth are not allowed in
the nonswimmer area. Isolated underwater hazards should be
Safe areas are marked with floats. Rescue personnel must be able to easily
reach the bottom. Maximum recommended water depth in clear
best inspected as
water is 12 feet. Maximum water depth in turbid water is 8 feet.
a team so hazards
can be identified
and removed
if possible.
12 swimming

--- Page 15 Text ---
.safety
Visibility. Underwater swimming and diving are prohibited in
turbid water. Turbid water exists when a swimmer treading
water cannot see his feet. Swimming at night is allowed only
in areas with both surface and underwater lighting.
Diving and elevated entry. Diving is permitted only into clear,
unobstructed water from heights no greater than 40 inches.
Water depth must be at least 7 feet for dives from fixed heights
up to 18 inches and at least 10 feet for dives from the side or a
diving board for heights from 18 inches to 40 inches. Persons
should not jump into water from heights greater than they are
tall, and only into water depths where impact with the bottom
is absent or slight. No elevated entry is permitted where the
person must clear any obstacle, including land.
water temperature. Comfortable water temperature for swim-
ming is near 80 degrees. Activity in water at 70 degrees or less
should be of limited duration and closely monitored for
negative effects of chilling.
water quality. Bodies of stagnant, fetid water, areas with signif-
icant algae or foam, or areas polluted by livestock or waterfowl
should be avoided. Comply with any signs posted by local health
authorities. Swimming is not allowed in pools with green, murky,
or cloudy water.
moving water. Participants should be able to easily regain and
maintain their footing in currents or waves. Areas with large
waves, swiftly flowing currents, or moderate currents that flow
toward the open sea or into areas of danger should be avoided.
weather. Participants should be moved from the water to a
position of safety whenever lightning or thunder threatens.
Wait at least 30 minutes after the last lightning flash or thunder
before leaving shelter. Take precautions to prevent sunburn,
dehydration, and hypothermia.
PFD use. Swimming in clear water over 12 feet deep, in turbid
water over 8 feet deep, or in flowing water may be allowed if all
participants wear properly fitted personal flotation devices and
the supervisor determines that swimming with PFDs is safe
under the circumstances.
swimming 13

--- Page 16 Text ---
safety.
4. Response Personnel (Lifeguards)
Every swimming activity must be closely and continuously
monitored by a trained rescue team on the alert for and
ready to respond during emergencies. Professionally trained
lifeguards satisfy this need when provided by a regulated facility
or tour operator. When lifeguards are not provided by others, the
adult supervisor must assign at least two rescue personnel, with
additional numbers to maintain a ratio to
participants of 1:10. The supervisor must
provide instruction and rescue equipment
and assign areas of responsibility as
outlined in the BSA publication Aquatics
Supervision. The qualified supervisor, the
designated response personnel, and the
lookout work together as a safety team.
A simple emergency action plan should
be formulated by the safety team and
shared with participants as appropriate.
5. Lookout
The lookout continuously monitors the conduct of the
swim, identifies any departures from safe swim Defense
guidelines, alerts response personnel as needed, and
monitors the weather and environment. The look-
out should have a clear view of the entire area
but be close enough for easy verbal
communication. The lookout must
have a sound understanding of
Safe Swim Defense but is not
required to perform rescues.
The adult supervisor may
serve simultaneously as the
lookout but must assign the
task to someone else if
engaged in activities that
preclude focused observation.
14 swimming

--- OCR from Page 16 Image 1 ---
guideline

monit

--- Page 17 Text ---
.safety
6. Ability groups
All youth and adult participants are designated as swim-
mers, beginners, or nonswimmers based on swimming
ability confirmed by standardized BsA swim classification
tests. Each group is assigned a specific swimming area with
depths consistent with those abilities. The classification tests
should be renewed annually, preferably at the beginning of
the season.
swimmers pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner
using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breast-
stroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy
resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one
swim without stops and must include at least one sharp turn.
After completing the swim, rest by floating.
Beginners pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth, level off, and swim 25 feet on the surface. Stop,
turn sharply, resume swimming, and return to the starting place.
Anyone who has not completed either the beginner or swimmer
tests is classified as a nonswimmer.
The nonswimmer area should be no more than waist to
chest deep and should be enclosed by physical boundaries such
as the shore, a pier, or lines. The enclosed beginner area should
contain water of standing depth and may extend to depths just
over the head. The swimmer area may be up to 12 feet in depth
in clear water and should be defined by floats or other markers.
swimming 15

--- Page 18 Text ---
safety.
7. Buddy system
Every participant is paired with
another participant. Buddies stay
together, monitor each other, and
alert the safety team if either needs
assistance or is missing.
Buddies check into and out of
the area together. Buddies are nor-
mally in the same ability group and
remain in their assigned area. If they
are not of the same ability group, then
they swim in the area assigned to the
buddy with the lesser ability.
Buddy checks indicate how closely the buddies are keeping
track of each other. Roughly every 10 minutes, or as needed to
keep the buddies together, the lookout, or other person desig-
nated by the supervisor, gives an audible signal, such as a single
whistle blast, and a call for “Buddies.” Buddies are expected
to raise each other’s hand before completion of a slow, audible
count to 10. Buddies who take longer to find each other should
be reminded of their responsibility for each other’s safety.
A buddy check also helps the safety team monitor everyone
in the water. If a buddy is missing, a search is begun immediately
in accordance with a prearranged emergency action plan. If every-
one has a buddy, a count is made by area and compared with
the total number known to be in the water. Once the count is
confirmed, a signal is given to resume swimming.
8. Discipline
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants
should know, understand, and respect the rules and proce-
dures for safe swimming provided by safe swim Defense
guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed prior to
the outing and reviewed for all participants at the water’s
edge just before the swimming activity begins. People are
more likely to follow directions when they know the reasons
for rules and procedures. Consistent, impartially applied rules
supported by skill and good judgment provide stepping-stones
to a safe, enjoyable outing.
16 swimming

--- Page 19 Text ---
.safety
Pool and surf swimming
Safe Swim Defense applies to swimming at a beach,
private or public pool, wilderness pond, stream,
lake, or anywhere Scouts swim. Here are some
additional points for the pool and the surf.
Pool. If the swimming activity is in a public
facility where others are using the pool at
the same time and the pool operator pro-
vides guard personnel, there may be no
need for additional Scout lifeguards and
lookouts. However, there must always be
an adult supervisor who understands his or
her responsibility and ensures that the ele-
ments of Safe Swim Defense are followed. The
buddy system is also critically important, even
in a public pool. Even in a crowd, you are alone
without protection if no one is paying attention to
your circumstances.
The rule that people swim only in water depths suited
to their ability also applies at pools. Most public pools divide
shallow and deep water. This may be enough for defining
appropriate swimming areas. If not, the supervisor should
clearly point out to participants the appropriate areas of the
public facility.
surf. The surf environment—with its wave action, currents,
tides, backwash, and sea life such as stinging jellyfish—requires Unless your unit
precautions for safe swimming that aren’t necessary in other
is experienced
environments. A swimmer’s physical condition and skill are
very important and should enable the swimmer to recover in ocean
footing in waves, swim for long periods without getting
swimming, it
worn out, and remain calm and in control when faced with
unexpected conditions. is probably best
Designated swimming areas are marked by flags or pennants
to swim at a
that are easy to see. Beginners and nonswimmers should be
positioned inshore from standing lifeguards who are equipped beach with
with rescue equipment. Better swimmers are permitted seaward
professional
of the lifeguards but must remain shoreward of anchored marker
buoys. The lifeguard-to-swimmer ratio should always be 1-to-10 lifeguards.
with a rescue team supplied with a rescue tube or other flota-
tion aid stationed at the beach area.
swimming 17

--- Page 20 Text ---
safety.
Rip Currents
The United States Lifesaving Association estimates that most rescues—
about 80 percent—at surf beaches involve swimmers caught in rip currents.
More than 100 swimmers die each year from this swimming hazard. Rip
currents are long, narrow sections of water that form after waves break and
the water goes back out. Rip currents form a funnel of current that moves
much faster than the current on either side. The current can be so strong
that it may be difficult or impossible to swim against it. It can carry an
unsuspecting swimmer long distances from shore and even out to sea.
Rip currents occur in oceans and any place where there are waves,
including bodies of water such as the Great Lakes. To avoid getting caught
in a rip current, do not swim near piers or jetties (walls built out into the
water to protect a harbor or beach). Rip currents are often hard to see, but
look for the following clues:
• An area having a noticeable difference in water color
• A channel of churning, choppy water
• A line of foam, seaweed, or debris moving steadily away from shore
• A break in the incoming wave pattern
If you are caught in a rip current, don’t fight it by swimming toward
the beach. Instead,
turn and escape by
swimming parallel
to the shore. If that
doesn’t work, float or
tread water. Call or
wave for help.
waves
beach
18 swimming

--- Page 21 Text ---
.safety
First Aid
Following Safe Swim Defense will eliminate any serious risks in
swimming, but remember to take proper precautions.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature
falls below the normal range and the body cannot produce
enough heat. Early signs include bluish lips and shivering.
Further cooling will upset the victim’s ability to think clearly
and to do simple tasks. The person may appear groggy and
lack coordination. As cooling continues, the pulse rate slows
and blood is directed to the critical organs and away from the
extremities as the body attempts to prevent further heat loss.
The heart and lungs keep working at the expense of the hands,
feet, and brain. Further cooling will lead to unconsciousness
and even death.
The first treatment for hypothermia is to prevent further
heat loss. Once out of the water, the victim should not be allowed
to walk. Move him to warmth and shelter such as a building,
tent, or vehicle. As soon as possible, remove wet clothing and
put on dry clothes or wrap the person in a blanket or dry tow-
els. If the victim is unconscious, open the airway and check for
breathing. You may apply warm (but not hot) towels or items
such as hot water bottles wrapped in a towel to only the trunk,
crotch, neck, and head. Do not rub his legs or apply warming Prevent heat
devices to the arms or legs. These actions may cause more blood
reactions by
to flow to the surface of the skin and away from vital organs.
Finally, since even mild cases of hypothermia place the body drinking plenty
in a highly stressed condition, closely watch all hypothermia
of fluids and
victims for several hours even if they appear to have recovered.
Heat reactions, including heat exhaustion and heatstroke, limiting time
result when the body can’t keep itself cool enough. Symptoms
out in the open
of heat exhaustion may include dizziness, faintness, nausea, and
a severe lack of energy. A person also may develop a headache, on hot days.
muscle cramps, and rapid pulse; look pale; and be sweating
heavily. To treat heat exhaustion, have the victim lie down in a
Most sunburns are first-degree burns, but repeated sunburn over a long
period of time can cause skin damage and increase the risk of skin cancer.
It’s best to prevent sunburn by using plenty of sunscreen with a sun protec-
tion factor (SPF) rating of at least 15, or by wearing a hat and covering up.
But if you have to treat a painful sunburn, use a cool, wet cloth and change
it frequently. Find shade.
swimming 19

--- Page 22 Text ---
safety.
cool, shady spot with the feet raised. Loosen clothing and cool
him with a damp cloth or a fan. Have him sip water. Recovery
should be rapid. If the condition worsens, get medical help.
Heatstroke is the extreme, life-threatening stage of a heat
reaction in which dehydration (water loss) has caused a very
high body temperature. The victim’s cooling system has started
to fail, and the person’s core temperature is at a dangerously
high level. In addition to any symptoms of heat exhaustion,
heatstroke symptoms can include hot, sweaty, red skin, confu-
sion, and disorientation; the victim may be unconscious. The
victim must be cooled immediately. Loosen tight clothing, fan
him, and apply wet towels. If you have ice packs, wrap them in
a thin barrier (such as a T-shirt) and place them under the arm-
pits and against the neck and groin area. If the person is able
to drink, give small amounts of cool water. Treat for shock and
seek emergency medical help.
If you have a
muscle cramps, sometimes called muscle spasms, occur
cramp while when muscles are not getting enough oxygen or nutrients or
swimming in deep when the blood flow cannot prevent the build-up of wastes
in muscles. Vigorous exercise and sweating can cause muscle
water and cannot
cramps in the limbs. Cold water or cold weather increases the
swim to safety, likelihood of cramping. Sudden, vigorous exercise without proper
warm-up also can increase the risk of muscle cramps. If a muscle
float on your back
begins to cramp while you are swimming, get out of the water
or survival float and massage the cramp. If conditions are hot, cool down and
drink fluids. If conditions are cold, find warmth and cover. Rub
and wait for help.
the cramping muscles to improve circulation.
Sunburn is a familiar condition that can occur during swim-
ming activities. Reflected sunlight from the water can be as
damaging as direct exposure. To prevent sunburn, cover up, use
a waterproof sunscreen, and limit your time in the sun. If your
skin begins to redden or feel painful, get out of the sun. To treat
sunburn, apply clean, wet compresses (cloths, towels, or gauze
pads) dipped in cool water. Protect the burned area from further
sun exposure.
stings and bites are not a common hazard when swim-
ming in pools or lakes, but in saltwater swimmers may suffer
severe stings from certain types of jellyfish or other saltwater
creatures. Knowing the body of water you are swimming in and
avoiding possible contact with dangerous sea animals is the best
strategy. For jellyfish stings, soak the area with vinegar or alcohol,
or cover with a paste of baking soda mixed with water. Get medi-
cal help if the pain is severe; if the pain does not let up in a short
20 swimming

--- Page 23 Text ---
.safety
time; or if the victim has an allergic reaction, feels dizzy, or has
trouble breathing. For typical insect stings and bites, apply basic
first aid as described in the Boy Scout Handbook or the First Aid Speaking of stings
merit badge pamphlet.
and bites, if you
Cuts and scrapes may occur on the feet when swimming
in natural waters if the bottom has not been carefully checked will be swimming
for hazards. In pool swimming, such injuries are more likely in the ocean,
when climbing in and out of the water without being careful
beware of sharks.
along rough edges or corners. As in other situations, the wound
should be cleaned, disinfected, and covered. The patrol first-aid (Although bull
kit should contain appropriate supplies for minor wound
sharks have been
treatment. For severe bleeding injuries, control bleeding with
direct pressure or at pressure points until emergency medical known to inhabit
help arrives.
the waterways of
spinal injuries can occur from diving into shallow or
obstructed water. Rescuers must be very careful when a spinal the Mississippi!)
injury is suspected. Spinal injuries can be fatal or can cause
The possibility of a
paralysis. If the victim is not handled properly, additional seri-
ous injury could result. Moving a victim is an extremely delicate shark bite is pretty
task best left to trained emergency personnel, but if no one else
remote, but play
is present you may need to act. In a swimming accident, you
may have to move the victim to prevent drowning or to perform it safe by finding
rescue breathing. out what you can
about the area
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is the important
first response in a cardiac emergency. CPR is used in where you will be
near-drownings when a victim’s breathing and heart-
swimming before
beat have stopped. Include individuals trained in CPR
you decide to
at every swimming outing. Complete CPR should be
attempted only by persons trained and qualified under dive in.
the supervision of a trained instructor. The Boy Scout
Handbook and the First Aid merit badge pamphlet fur-
ther explain CPR and when it should be used.
Some important techniques are not covered by
requirement 2 of the Swimming merit badge. To receive
full and proper CPR training, contact your American Red
Cross chapter or the American Heart Association. See
the resources section at the end of this pamphlet. Your
counselor can help you.
swimming 21

--- Page 24 Text ---
safety.
When tending to a suspected spinal injury victim, move
the victim’s head, neck, and back as little as possible. The
technique used to limit this movement is called in-line stabi-
lization. For information on this technique, see the chapter
concerning spinal injury management in the Lifesaving merit
badge pamphlet.
Hyperventilation is the result of overbreathing, either
deliberately or as a result of panic. Hyperventilating decreases
the level of carbon dioxide in the blood and suppresses the
breathing reflex. The likely result is dizziness and fainting.
Hyperventilation from panic is not likely to occur in swimming
if all participants stay in water suited to their individual skill
levels and the activity is properly supervised and disciplined.
If a swimmer becomes panicky, he or she should be removed
from the water and calmed. Before resuming any water activity,
determine and resolve the cause of the panic. A foolish swim-
mer may deliberately hyperventilate to suppress the breathing
reflex for underwater swimming. This is dangerous and puts the
swimmer at high risk. Such conduct is prohibited and should be
sharply disciplined.
survival skills
Cold water
When a person is in cold water, the skin and nearby tissues cool
quickly. The body immediately begins producing heat to rewarm
Moving water and the skin and to prevent the cooling of vital organs. Hypothermia
occurs when the body loses heat faster than it can produce it,
wind substantially
which causes the internal body temperature to decrease.
increase the loss Water or air temperature lower than 70 degrees poses hypo-
thermia risks. If goose bumps appear on wet skin shortly after
of body heat.
leaving the water, then the air temperature should be considered
Swimming and cold and swimmers should take proper precautions. The first
treading water protection for cold-water activity is to reduce the length of time
in or on the water. At 70 degrees, maximum safe in-the-water
also cool the
time is approximately 20 minutes. Open-water swimming in
body faster than temperatures of 65 degrees or lower may pose substantial risks
and should be avoided. In all swimming activities, precautions
remaining still.
should include procedures and equipment for immediate warm-
ing of anyone showing symptoms of chill.
22 swimming

--- Page 25 Text ---
.safety
Activities Afloat
For all activity afloat on cold water or in cold weather,
wear appropriate clothing to keep you warm. You
should wear a personal flotation device (PFD) at all
times, normally on top of the outermost garment. Have
a dry change of clothes available in case of a spill. As in
swimming, preparation and plans for any activity afloat
should include procedures and equipment for warming
anyone showing symptoms of chill. Overboard activ-
ity is not recommended in water temperatures of 65
degrees or lower, except for closely supervised capsize
skills training in preparation for activity afloat.
A properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–approved PFD should be
worn for all activities afloat in small craft. The PFD will help keep
you afloat. In addition, it can provide insulation and significantly
reduce heat loss in cold water that could lead to hypothermia.
If you are alone in cold water and more than a short
distance from safety, your best strategy is to float motionless.
This will help you conserve heat. Keep your PFD and all
clothing on for insulation. Heat loss is most rapid from the head
and crotch.
Because water will move heat away
from the body faster than air, keeping
your face and head in the water will
speed up heat loss. Vigorous swimming
will chill you most rapidly. Treading
water is tiring and will produce heat
loss almost as rapidly as swimming.
Survival floating, or drown-proofing
(described later in this chapter), might
be somewhat better than swimming or
treading water if your movements are
slow and limited, but submerging the
head and face will increase heat loss.
For treading water, you can use the
rotary kick, but do so sparingly. Your
body will tire quickly and lose heat
rapidly when treading water.
swimming 23

--- Page 26 Text ---
safety.
HELP (heat escape lessening posture) Huddle together with sides touching.
For these reasons, your best cold-water survival strategy
is to float motionless with your PFD and clothes on, your head
out of the water, and your legs drawn up close to your chest.
This is called the heat escape lessening posture (HELP). If you
are stranded in cold water with one or more persons, you should
huddle together to reduce the cold-water contact and conserve
heat. To do this, press together tightly and float motionless.
Surviving in Cold Water
• Wear a PFD.
• Keep your head out of the water.
• Get out of the water onto your boat, a log, a raft, or
anything that floats.
• Remain as still as possible while in the water.
• While afloat in the water, do not attempt to swim
unless it is to reach a nearby craft, fellow survivor,
or floating object that you can lean on or climb onto.
• If there is more than one person in the water, hud-
dling is recommended while waiting to be rescued.
• Maintain a positive mental attitude. Never give
up hope.
24 swimming

--- Page 27 Text ---
.safety
survival floating, or drown-proofing
survival Floating
What if you find yourself in deep water without flotation sup-
port and too far from shore to swim? Perhaps you were swept
out to sea by an unusually strong current or thrown overboard
from a boat in strong waves. You must keep yourself afloat until
help arrives. Floating on your back is a good plan if there are no
waves. Another possibility is survival floating, or drown-proofing,
which will work even if you are being tossed around by wind
and waves.
To survival float, begin by taking a breath, putting your face
in the water, and floating facedown in a relaxed position (the
jellyfish float). For most people, the back of the neck will break
the surface of the water. After holding your breath for a comfort-
able length of time, begin to exhale slowly while spreading your
legs and bringing your arms up near the surface. As you exhale,
bring your legs together and push gently down with your arms.
This movement should give you just enough lift to raise your
head and mouth above the surface for a quick breath. After get-
ting your breath, lower your head and immediately return to
your relaxed, facedown position.
Several different arm and leg movements (such as an
occasional slow scissors kick) may work well when survival
floating. Experiment and practice to find what works best for
you. Remember: Less movement is better because you are trying
to conserve your energy. Slow, relaxed movement is better than
quick or precise movements that take more energy.
swimming 25

--- Page 28 Text ---
safety.
As you practice survival floating, you may find that you
need to keep your head above water longer than one quick
inhalation and that you end up briefly treading water. This will
quickly tire you. To correct the problem, be sure to exhale com-
pletely while your head is down in the water. Practice survival
floating until it becomes easy for you to make slow movements
and to exhale in the water and lift your head just enough for
one quick breath. Remember to relax—it may be a long wait.
Clothing inflation
Occasionally, a boater or passenger will fall into deep water far
from shore. If this ever happens to you, being able to inflate (fill
with air) a shirt or a pair of pants is a survival skill that could
save your life. These items of clothing can help you stay afloat
while you swim to safety or until you are rescued.
There are several skills used to inflate clothing.
While inflating your clothes, you may have to tread
water by using the scissors kick or whip kick, but this
may soon tire you. If you become tired before your
clothes can be inflated, you must be able to rest by float-
ing on your back as well as in a facedown survival float.
If you fall into the water wearing a button-up shirt
made of cotton or some other tightly woven fabric, you
can stay afloat by trapping air in the shirt’s back and
shoulders. (A shirt without a collar does not work well
for flotation.) Button the top collar button or hold the
collar closed with your hand. Open a space between
the second and third buttons. Position your head so that
your mouth is over the opening and then blow air into
it. Hold the collar tight and keep your elbows down to
prevent air leakage.
A pair of pants can provide additional flota-
tion. While wearing the inflated shirt, first remove
your shoes, letting them sink or float free. You don’t
need to worry about your socks. Then remove your
pants carefully. Do not turn them inside out. Inflate
a pocket with a puff of air. The pocket will support
the pants while you carry out the next steps. It will
also keep them from sinking if they slip out of your
hands. Next, use a square knot to tie the pant legs
together as near to the bottom of the pants as you
can. Pull the knot tight and close the fly.
step 1—inflate a pocket.
26 swimming

--- Page 29 Text ---
.safety
“Splashing” air into the pants is the
quickest and easiest means of inflation, but
it might take some practice before you mas-
ter this technique. Hold the waistband open
just below the surface, cup your hand in the
air, and strike the water just in front of the
pants. Follow through so that the air pushed
down by your hand enters the opening of
the pants. You should move the air just step 2—splash air into the pants.
below the surface and then sideways so that it
bubbles upward into the pants. The method will not work if you
fail to lift your hand clear of the water or if you strike directly
downward. If you have difficulty with this method, you can fill
the pants by holding the waistband under the water with both
hands, taking a breath, sinking so that your mouth is lower than
the waistband and then blowing air into them from beneath.
When the pants are inflated, grasp the waist
with the fly toward you and place your head
through the opening between the legs. Rest your
head on the knot, lie back, and relax. If you
have a belt, you can use it in several ways. In
one method, you close the belt (if not already
closed), grasp it in front of the fly, pull down
to bunch the belt loops, and tighten the
waist. Insert your leg through the loop
formed by the excess in the belt. The other
way is to slide both ends of the belt out
step 3—Place the pants around
of the front belt loops, so that it passes
your neck.
through the back loops only. Place the front
of the pants next to your chest and fasten the
belt behind you. Doing this frees up your hands for signaling
or slowly swimming the elementary backstroke. Air will escape
from the pants if you allow the material to dry. Splash water
over them from time to time to help them stay filled with air.
As needed, add air to the pants by loosening the waistband and
splashing in air.
swimming 27

--- Page 31 Text ---
.swimming skills
Swimming Skills
One of the most important elements of safety in the water is the
ability to swim. Strong swimmers can swim a reasonable dis-
tance with a confident, steady stroke. But strong swimmers are
not safe swimmers until they can make a safe water entry, swim
a restful stroke, and maintain themselves in the water when
hurt or exhausted.
Every First Class Scout has demonstrated that he is a strong,
safe swimmer who has mastered certain in-water skills. The BSA
swimmer test—required for First Class advancement—includes
these in-water skills and represents the minimum level of ability
for safe deepwater swimming. Consider the components of
the test:
1. “Jump feetfirst into water over your head in depth, . . .”
You must be able to make an abrupt entry into deep water and
begin swimming without any aids. Walking in from shallow
water, easing in from the edge or down a ladder, pushing off
from a pool’s side or bottom, and gaining forward momentum
by diving do not satisfy this requirement.
2. “. . . swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or more
of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen,
or crawl; . . .”
You must be able to cover distance with a strong, confident
stroke. The 75 yards must not be the outer limit of your ability.
You should be able to complete the distance and still have
enough stamina to avoid undue risks. Dog paddling and strokes
repeatedly interrupted and restarted are insufficient, and under-
water swimming is not allowed. The strokes listed above may
include variations. Any strong sidestroke or breaststroke, or any
strong overarm stroke—including the back crawl—is acceptable.
swimming 29

--- Page 32 Text ---
swimming skills.
3. “. . . then swim 25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. . . .”
You must perform a restful, free-breathing backstroke that can be
used to avoid exhaustion during swimming activity. This part of
the test will need to follow a more strenuous swimming activity
to show that you can, in fact, use the backstroke to rest and
recover. You must accomplish the change of stroke in deep water
without any push-off or other aid. Any variation of the elemen-
tary backstroke is acceptable. An overarm back crawl may be
used if it clearly allows you to rest and catch your breath.
4. “. . . The 100 yards must be swum continuously and include
at least one sharp turn. . . .”
You must cover the total distance without stopping. The sharp
turn demonstrates your ability to reverse direction in deep water
without assistance or a push-off from the side or bottom.
5. “. . . After completing the swim, rest by floating.”
This critically important part of the test evaluates your ability to
maintain yourself in the water indefinitely even though
exhausted or otherwise unable to keep swimming. Treading
water or swimming in place will further tire you and therefore is
unacceptable. The length of the float test is not important,
except that it must be long enough for the tester to determine
that you are resting and likely could continue to do so for a pro-
longed period. Drown-proofing may be sufficient if it is clearly
restful, but it is not preferred. If the test is completed except for
the floating requirement, you may be retested on the floating
(after instruction) only if the tester feels confident that you can
initiate the float when exhausted.
30 swimming

--- Page 33 Text ---
.swimming skills
Entering the water
Get into the habit of entering the water feetfirst whenever you
practice swimming skills. This will protect your head and neck
from being injured by unseen objects below the surface or when
the water is shallower than you think. It is always safer to learn
and practice entries in water that is over your head in depth.
3 feet maximum
Leaping entry (stride jump)
Leaping Entry (stride Jump)
Stand with both feet near the edge of the pier or pool.
The water should be at least 5 feet deep. Lean forward
and step far out over the water while pushing off with
the other foot. Keep your arms straight and slightly to
the side. Keep your head up by looking forward. You
should lean into and move out over the water, not jump up. Limit
the height of the starting point to 3 feet above the water. As your
feet and legs enter the water, snap them together as in a scissors
kick. Bring your arms straight down in a slapping motion to break
your entry into the water. Timing is key; if you do it right, you
won’t even get your chin wet. In lifesaving, this entry allows you
to keep your subject constantly in sight.
swimming 31

--- Page 34 Text ---
swimming skills.
Floating
Floating faceup is the most restful way to maintain yourself in
Whenever you
deep water. This simple skill requires buoyancy and balance.
are floating, try Buoyancy is the ability to float. Your body has two balancing
points known as the center of buoyancy and the center of weight.
to keep your
When you are floating, your body’s center of buoyancy is in
lungs well your chest. The air in your lungs is mainly what keeps you
afloat. Your body’s center of weight is lower—about the level of
inflated with
your hips. Your hips and legs are quite heavy, because they are
air. This will made of muscle and bone. In the water, gravity pulls your hips
and legs down, while the air in your lungs makes the upper part
help you
of your body more buoyant. When you try to float on your back,
remain buoyant. your legs and feet sink and your head and chest rise.
To float without moving, you need to adjust your body
so that the center of buoyancy is directly above the center of
weight. For many people, this means floating with the feet well
below the surface and only the head or mouth at the water’s
surface. When floating, some swimmers are positioned almost
vertically in the water.
It is possible to float in a more horizontal position. You can-
not change your center of buoyancy, because you cannot change
the position of your lungs. You can, however, change your cen-
ter of weight. To change your center of weight when floating,
move your arms away from your sides and above your head.
Bend your legs at the knees and let your feet sink or pull your
feet up behind and underneath you. This will shift your center
of weight closer to your center of buoyancy.
Practice floating in chest-deep water. Start from a stand-
ing position. Take a deep breath and hold it. Bend your knees
slightly and lean backward, arching your back and moving your
neck backward until your ears are in the water and your chin
is your highest point. Slowly move your hands and arms away
from your sides with your palms up. Keep your arms and hands
in the water and move them so they form a Y above your
shoulders. Do not try to arm stroke or kick into a higher position,
because this will throw off your balance. Relax and let your body
settle into its natural floating level and position in the water.
32 swimming

--- Page 35 Text ---
.swimming skills
Remember, the natural floating position
for many people is with their legs and feet
hanging down almost vertically. Others float
high on the water with their hips and legs
near the surface. Begin by holding your float
position as long as you can hold your breath.
When you need to breathe, quickly exhale and
then breathe in fresh air through your nose or
mouth to keep your lungs filled with as much
air as possible. As your floating experience
and confidence increase, you will be able to
breathe in a more relaxed and natural rhythm.
swimming 33

--- Page 37 Text ---
.swimming strokes
Swimming Strokes
By completing the Second Class and First Class swim-
ming requirements, you have shown that you have
some skill and endurance. To earn the Swimming
merit badge you must further demonstrate your
swimming strength and stroke proficiency by
swimming 150 yards using a combination of
five strokes. You must swim continuously in
a strong manner for the entire distance and
show good form on the front crawl or trud-
gen for 25 yards, the back crawl for 25 yards,
the sidestroke for 25 yards, the breaststroke
for 25 yards, and the elementary backstroke
for 50 yards.
“Good form” means that you need to
perform each stroke with the technique
described in this pamphlet. For example, the
breaststroke is a restful stroke that includes a long,
prone glide between strokes. If your breaststroke is a
vigorous, bobbing stroke as used in competition, it is not
satisfactory for this requirement. Doing the backstroke using
a frog kick rather than a whip kick also is unacceptable for
this requirement.
You also are required to swim the specified strokes in a
“strong manner.” This means no rest stops and no gasping,
panting finishes. The stroke sequence begins with the more
strenuous strokes and moves through to the more restful strokes,
with the last stroke being the most restful. You should follow the
stroke sequence as presented in the requirement. If you complete
the swim “in a strong manner” in the specified sequence, then
you should be rested and able to continue well beyond the
150-yard requirement.
On the following pages, you will find the required strokes
illustrated and explained as you should swim them to complete
requirement 5.
swimming 35

--- OCR from Page 37 Image 1 ---
5 swim-

--- Page 38 Text ---
swimming strokes.
Front Crawl
The front crawl has three parts: the flutter kick, the rotating arm
stroke, and rhythmic breathing. It is the fastest and one of the
most graceful of all swimming strokes.
In competition,
the crawl stroke is
called “freestyle.”
Front crawl, side and front views
36 swimming

--- Page 39 Text ---
.swimming strokes
Kick. The flutter kick relies on relaxed ankles and the use
of the entire leg. The movement begins at the hips and
flows to the feet. As one foot moves downward, the other
comes up in a beating, or fluttering, rhythm. Kick from
the hip and thigh, not from the knee. During the down-
ward part of the kick, your ankle stays relaxed and your knee
is slightly bent. As your foot reaches the end of the kick,
straighten your leg and allow your foot to snap downward.
As your foot moves upward, keep that leg and knee straight. Flutter kick
The kick should be smooth and steady, and your feet
should stay just under the water with only your heels breaking
the surface. The distance between your feet is usually only about
8 to 12 inches. The number of kicks, or beats, during one complete
arm cycle can vary. For swimming short distances, six kicks per
arm cycle works well. You can practice the kick by holding the
edge of the pool or by supporting yourself on a kickboard.
Arm stroke. Most of the forward motion of the front crawl
comes from the arm stroke. After diving or pushing off on
your stomach with your arms out in front of you, begin the
arm stroke with your hands just below the surface. Keep your
hands relaxed with your fingers straight. The water level should The catch phase
be between your eyebrows and your hairline. Look forward and
of the arm stroke
slightly down so you can see where you are going. Avoid looking
straight down or bobbing your head up and down. is called the
The arm stroke has three phases: catch, power, and
“catch” because
recovery—or CPR. To begin the catch, slightly bend your right
wrist and elbow as you move the entire arm downward. Have it feels like your
your palm facing away from your body. Keep your elbow, hand,
palm and upper
and wrist fixed in this position. Your hand should be directly in
line with your shoulder. arm have grabbed
For the power phase, straighten your wrist and bend the
hold of something.
elbow so your forearm is about 45 degrees from the upper arm.
Point your fingers down and inward. Push hard against the water,
and sweep your hand and forearm down and back under your
chest. Your hand will pass just a few inches from the centerline of
your body. Your palm should be flat and should push backward
against the water. As your hand becomes level with your shoul-
der, begin to straighten out your arm as it continues to move
back and out to just beside your right hip. Your upper body will
roll, with your left hip turning down and toward the centerline.
This turns your right hip up toward the top of the water just as
your right hand reaches the end of the power phase.
swimming 37

--- Page 40 Text ---
swimming strokes.
As your hand exits the water, the recovery phase begins.
Start by lifting your elbow up and forward. Keep your wrist and
hand relaxed and trailing behind or hanging below your elbow.
As your hand passes the shoulder, it reaches up and forward
to enter the water again when it is at shoulder level. When your
fingertips are even with your eye and your arm is straightened
to about three-quarters of its length, allow your fingertips to
smoothly enter the water. Rotate your hand so that your
thumb enters first as your arm straightens under the water
to its full length.
The “Catch-Up” Style
For many recreational swimmers the arms are always in opposite posi-
tions when they do the front crawl. That is, as the right hand exits the
water at the hip, the left hand enters the water and moves into the catch
position. While one arm is in the power phase, the other arm is in the
recovery phase. However, some recreational swimmers leave the forward
arm straight while the recovering arm “catches up.” In other words, the
recovering arm enters the water while the other arm is just beginning the
power phase, instead of when the power phase is nearly complete. Both
arms are briefly forward of the head. When swimming at a relaxed place,
the “catch-up” style allows a short glide in a streamlined position.
Breathing and Coordination. Swimmers doing the front crawl
use a breathing rhythm of one breath for every one, two, three,
or more arm cycles. For the purpose of learning and demonstrat-
ing the front crawl, you should take a breath for every set of arm
cycles on the same side. During the previous arm cycles, slowly
exhale through your nose and mouth.
When you need to take a breath, exhale all of the remain-
ing air into the water during the power phase of the arm stroke.
As your body rotates during the middle of the power phase, start
turning your head so that your mouth is out of the water just as
your hand exits by your hip. At the beginning of the recovery
phase, inhale quickly and return your head to its former posi-
tion. Take a breath every arm cycle until you can do it without
having to pause. When the stroke is performed correctly, a wave
will form around your head as you turn to breathe. Your mouth
will be located in the trough of the wave.
38 swimming

--- Page 41 Text ---
.swimming strokes
Back Crawl
The back crawl, or backstroke, has two parts: a flutter kick and
a continuous arm stroke. There is no rhythmic breathing since
the face and mouth are above the water.
Kick. The back crawl kick is similar to the
front crawl flutter kick but is done deeper in
the water. The legs alternate, with the
upward kick being the most forceful. Your
ankles remain flexible and your toes point
away from your head at all times. This
allows your feet to function like divers’ fins.
On the downward part of the kick, keep your
leg and knee straight. For the upward part of
the kick, bend your knee and kick from the
hip as if you were punting a football with
the top of your foot. When your knee is just
a few inches below the surface, stop the
upward motion of the thigh and straighten
the knee and leg. Remember to keep your
ankles relaxed, so your feet will respond to
the water pressure as your legs move.
Arm stroke. The arm stroke for the back
crawl involves alternating the arms, much
like the front crawl arm stroke. You can start
the arm stroke by pushing off on your back
with both arms at your side and then lifting
one arm out of the water, keeping it straight.
As your arm moves back toward your head,
roll a little onto the same side and drop your
shoulder a bit deeper in the water. Your
hand should enter the water little finger
first. Your palm should face out and your
wrist should be slightly bent. Allow your
hand to slice down into the water until it is
8 to 12 inches below the surface. Your hand
is now in the catch position. At the same
time, start lifting your other arm out of the
water for its recovery phase so that it will
enter the water when the first arm has
finished the power phase.
Back crawl, side and front views
swimming 39

--- Page 42 Text ---
swimming strokes.
The key to the power phase of the arm stroke is bending
your elbow and pushing against the water with your hand
The back crawl toward your feet. Do not try to keep your arm straight, which
will either pull it to the side of your body or up toward the
can be used
surface. As your hand moves from the catch position, begin
for recreational to bend your elbow so that it points toward the bottom of the
swimming and lake or pool. Keep your elbow bent and pull directly toward
your feet with your entire arm. In the water, keep your hand
in competition.
higher than your elbow. About halfway through the power
phase, your elbow will be bent 90 degrees and your hand
will move toward the surface of the water.
The second half of the power phase involves using your
hand to push the water toward your hip and straightening out
your arm. At the very end of the power phase, flip your hand
downward as it passes your thigh. Your palm will be facing the
bottom and your arm will be fully straightened. This downward
motion of the hand will cause your body to roll to the opposite
side just as your other hand is entering the water. This raises your
shoulder to make it easier to recover the arm while the opposite
shoulder goes deeper into the water for its catch position.
The recovery phase is intended to give the arm muscles a
rest. Begin by lifting your arm straight up in the air so your thumb
and back of your hand leave the water first. Relax your hand,
wrist, arm, and back muscles, but do not bend your elbow. Move
your arm in a half-circle motion. The opposite arm will follow
the same pattern, beginning its pull as your body rolls toward
that side to begin the recovery of the first arm. Your arms are
directly opposite each other at all times.
Breathing and Coordination. Body position is important for
the back crawl. Be sure to keep your hips up and avoid a partial
sitting position. Your head should be back with your ears in the
water. Avoid turning your head from side to side, because your
head position serves to anchor and steady the entire stroke. To
coordinate arm and leg movements, count a six-beat kick (each
upward leg kick is one beat) and complete one full arm cycle in
six beats. In other words, one arm should enter the water on the
count of one, and the opposite arm should enter the water on
the count of four. Although the back crawl is a free-breathing
stroke, you should develop a breathing rhythm that feels com-
fortable to you. The simplest pattern is to inhale when one arm
recovers and exhale when the other arm recovers.
40 swimming

--- Page 43 Text ---
.swimming strokes
sidestroke
The sidestroke is a good long-distance stroke with a long, restful
glide. It also introduces the scissors kick, which is used in swim-
ming rescues. The scissors kick is mainly responsible for the
forward motion of the stroke.
Kick. The scissors kick is a powerful kick that provides a resting
period between arm strokes. To do the scissors kick, bring your
knees together and then bend them as you bring your lower legs
and heels toward the buttocks. Without pausing, move your
legs into the catch position. Move your top leg forward and your
bottom leg back until your legs and knees are straight. To move
into the power phase, bring both legs back together with a force
ful snapping motion like closing a pair of scissors. Keep your legs
together during the glide position with the toes pointed back.
sidestroke, side and top views
swimming 41

--- Page 44 Text ---
swimming strokes.
Arm stroke. Start in the glide position on your side with one ear
in the water and the nose, mouth, and other ear out of the water.
With your body on its side, straighten the leading (bottom) arm
to its full length with your ear resting on your shoulder and your
palm facedown. The trailing (top) arm should rest comfortably
alongside your body with the hand above the thigh. Turn the palm
of the leading arm from facing down until it is vertical with the
thumb on top. Begin moving the leading arm into a catch position
by moving the hand in a downward direction toward the feet.
The power phase is a pull with the hand just below the top
of the water and the elbow bent. Move your leading arm until it
reaches the middle of your chest, while you move your trailing
arm up the side of your body. Both hands should arrive at the
same time in front of the upper chest. The trailing arm begins
its catch and power phases while the leading arm recovers by
moving back into the glide position. Reach out straight out from
your shoulder with the trailing arm. Use your hand and arm to
push the water toward your feet while they move to the side of
your body. Keep both arms straight during the glide, or resting
phase of the stroke.
Breathing and Coordination. In the sidestroke, the arm strokes
and scissors kick are combined so that the legs are drawn up as
the leading and trailing arms move toward the chest. To help
coordinate your arms and legs in the sidestroke, remember the
phrase, “pull, kick, glide.” Start by moving your legs into the
catch position. With your trailing arm straight and your legs
apart for the scissors kick, the power phases for both the trailing
arm and kick begin and end at the same time. During this time
the leading arm recovers to the glide position. When you have
finished both the kick and trailing arm stroke, rest and relax
your muscles. Hold the glide position for three or four counts
and then repeat the stroke. Breathing is easy with the sidestroke
since the mouth is out of the water. Breathe in during the power
phase of the leading arm and breathe out during the power
phase of the trailing arm.
42 swimming

--- Page 45 Text ---
.swimming strokes
Trudgen
There are several variations of the trudgen,
including the trudgen crawl and the double
trudgen. Swimmers use the trudgen and its
variations, because they take less energy
than the front crawl.
Kick. The trudgen uses the scissors kick.
Between kicks, the legs rest and trail in the
water. The scissors kick usually is shorter
in the trudgen than in the sidestroke.
Arm stroke. The arm strokes are the
same as those for the front crawl.
Breathing and Coordination. Coordinate
the arm movements and scissors kick
as in the sidestroke. If you are doing the
trudgen crawl, do two or three flutter
kicks between scissors kicks. In the double
trudgen, there are two scissors kicks for
each arm cycle but no flutter kicks. Roll
onto your side to breathe. As the arm on
your breathing side completes the power
phase and begins the recovery phase, turn
on your side and take a breath.
This interesting stroke was named
for English swimmer John Trudgen,
who introduced the stroke in compe-
tition in 1875.
Trudgen, side view
swimming 43

--- Page 46 Text ---
swimming strokes.
The breaststroke
is one of the Breaststroke, side and front views
oldest strokes
Breaststroke
used in Scouting.
Variations of the breaststroke range from a restful distance
stroke to a competitive racing stroke. With a longer glide as\
taught in Scouting, the breaststroke is a powerful, long-distance
stroke that conserves energy and has applications in lifesaving.
The stroke uses a whip kick and a shallow arm pull.
Kick. The breaststroke kick, or whip kick, starts in the glide
position. Bring your heels toward the hips as far as possible just
beneath the water’s surface. Keeping your knees bent, spread
your knees until they are no farther apart than hip width. Your
feet must be farther apart than your knees. Keep your ankles fully
flexed and your toes pointed outward. This is the catch position.
To begin the power phase, move your feet and lower legs in a
44 swimming

--- Page 47 Text ---
.swimming strokes
whipping motion, pushing outward and backward until your legs
and feet are touching in a glide position. At the end of the power
phase, your toes should be pointed back and away from your
body. As in the scissors kick, the speed of the whip kick should
increase rapidly and continue until the end of the kick.
Arm stroke. Start from a prone float with your arms out straight.
Slightly bend your wrists and point your fingers downward. Turn
your hands to a slightly palms-out position. Then bend your
arms a little at the elbows as the palms and arms push out and
The pattern
down until your hands are farther apart than the width of your
shoulders. This is the catch position. Begin the power phase by the hands
pressing your arms and palms downward until your elbows trace in the
form a 90-degree angle, with your forearms pointing toward
breaststroke
the bottom. During the power phase, your hands and forearms
should always be below the elbows and your elbows should is sometimes
always be below your shoulders. The arm pull should feel as
described as
though you are grabbing the water ahead of you and pulling
yourself forward until your head passes your hands. Begin the an upside-
recovery phase by bringing your hands in together under the chin
down heart.
and your elbows to the sides of your body. Finish the recovery
by pushing your hands forward just under the surface, fingers
leading, until your arms are at their full length in a glide position.
Breathing and Coordination. While doing the breaststroke, you
should exhale slowly in the water between breaths. Between the
catch and the power phase, lift your chin out of the water, finish
exhaling, and quickly take a breath. As your arms begin the
recovery phase, place your chin and face back in the water. The
water level should be between your eyebrows and hairline. Avoid
lifting your head and shoulders too far out of the water to prevent
bobbing and losing forward momentum.
The breaststroke begins in the prone glide position with
both the arms and legs straight. To coordinate the kick, the arm
stokes, and the breathing, think of the phrase, “pull, breathe,
kick, glide.” As your arms complete the power phase, take a
breath, and then draw your feet toward the hips. When your
arms are about halfway through the recovery phase, begin the
whip kick. Time the arm strokes and kick so that the arms and
legs are both at their full length as the kick finishes. Rest in the
prone position as your body glides through the water. When the
glide begins slow down, it is time to start another stroke.
swimming 45

--- Page 48 Text ---
swimming strokes.
Elementary backstroke, side and top views
46 swimming

--- Page 49 Text ---
.swimming strokes
Elementary Backstroke
The elementary backstroke is the resting stroke for the last
50 yards of your test. Use this stroke for long-distance swimming
or when you are tiring and want to rest while continuing to make
forward progress.
Kick. The elementary backstroke uses the whip kick. Floating on
your back, spread your knees no farther apart than hip width.
Drop your heels by bending your knees. Keep your knees just
below the surface. Turn your feet so your toes are pointing out
and your ankles are fully flexed up. This is the catch position.
To begin the power phase, move your feet and lower legs in a
whipping motion to trace an oval shape. Your feet must move
outward wider than the position of your knees. End the kick with
your legs straight and feet touching. Your toes should be pointed
and just below the water’s surface. Drop your heels down to
begin the recovery phase.
Arm stroke. The arm stroke for the elementary backstroke is
To avoid getting
simple. Start on your back in the glide position. Keep your legs
straight with your toes pointed and have your arms at your sides water in your
with your hands on your thighs. Slowly move your hands either
mouth and
up the centerline of your chest or up the sides of your body with
your elbows tucked in until your hands reach the shoulders. nose, keep your
Without pausing, straighten out your arms with your palms forehead slightly
facing your feet. In a single motion, sweep your arms quickly
higher than your
toward your feet, bending your elbows and wrists throughout the
stroke to push water backward. Recover the arms by bringing chin as your
your hands back up toward your shoulders.
arms push
Breathing and Coordination. In the elementary backstroke,
toward your feet.
the arms and the legs provide power at the same time. The kick
takes less time than the arms because the legs move a shorter
distance than the arms, and they are stronger. For these reasons,
you should begin the recovery of the arms before the legs. Don’t
begin the kick until your arms have begun their power phase.
With some practice, you should be able to time it so that you
finish both the kick and arm stroke together. Strive to make your
movements continuous. At the conclusion of the stroke, relax
and allow your body to glide through the water for three or four
counts. Don’t be in a hurry. Remember, this is a resting stroke.
As you finish your glide, repeat the process.
swimming 47

--- Page 51 Text ---
.surface Dives
Surface Dives
If you want to swim underwater to retrieve an object or explore
the bottom, a surface dive is an easy way of going down. This
swimming skill is commonly used in snorkeling and lifesaving.
There are two ways to do a surface dive: feetfirst from an upright
position or headfirst from a forward swimming position.
Feetfirst surface Dive
While treading water in an upright position, raise yourself partly
out of the water by snapping your legs together in a scissors
kick and pressing your hands down on the water. Then let
yourself sink. As your face goes under, turn your palms out
and press upward with your arms and hands. Doing this will
send you down fast. Be sure to keep your hands in the water
while pushing up. Keep your feet together and toes pointed to
streamline your body. When you near the bottom, change to
a swimming position by pulling your knees in until you are
tucked. Drop your head and start an underwater breaststroke.
Feetfirst surface dive
swimming 49

--- Page 52 Text ---
surface Dives.
Headfirst surface Dives
The easiest way to do the headfirst pike surface dive is while
moving forward with a breaststroke. As you begin a new arm
stroke, keep your legs in the glide position and bend sharply at
the waist with your head down so that the upper portion of your
body is angled toward the bottom. Then reverse the direction of
your arm stroke while lifting your legs out of the water and into
the air. When you complete the reverse arm motion and leg lift,
you will be in a vertical handstand position with your body
straight and your arms straight and pointing toward the bottom.
In this streamlined position, the weight of your legs above the
water will drive you downward. It all should happen quickly in
one smooth motion. Once your feet are underwater, you can
begin to swim. If you want to go deeper or faster after you are
completely beneath the surface, use the breaststroke, which you
also can use to swim along the bottom.
Headfirst surface dive in pike position
50 swimming

--- Page 53 Text ---
.surface Dives
A tuck surface dive is another option you can use to fulfill
requirement 7b. Instead of lifting your legs as you would for a
pike surface dive, pull your knees toward your chest and push
them upward as you point your head and arms toward the bot-
tom. The tuck might be a bit easier than the pike to learn at
first, but you will not dive as deep or as quickly.
Remember that it is the weight of your legs above you
that pushes you down into the water. It is important
to get them up into a vertical position in all headfirst
surface dives.
swimming 51

--- Page 55 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
Snorkeling and Scuba
Snorkeling, or skin diving, is a sport that a swimmer of
any age, size, or strength can enjoy. The sport basically
has two activities: (1) the relatively passive activity of
floating or swimming on the surface using a breathing
tube and eye cover to view underwater scenes, and
(2) breath-hold diving to swim and explore underwater
environments or recover submerged items.
The selection and Fit of Equipment
There are four basic pieces of snorkeling equipment:
mask, snorkel, fins, and vest.
The mask
The most important piece of snorkeling equipment is the
mask. Because human eyes are designed to see through air,
the mask provides the necessary airspace through which the
eyes can focus clearly. Additionally, the mask keeps water
out of your nose so that you can use the breathing tube
more comfortably.
Masks come in a variety of designs, but the most common
are the one-piece and two-piece faceplate varieties. Generally, the
two-piece design is better. It has less air between the glass and
the face, which makes it easier to adjust the pressure within the
mask to prevent “mask squeeze.” It is very important that the
mask have a tempered glass lens. A tempered lens is stronger and
Avoid masks
if broken will shatter into pieces with no sharp edges or splinters.
The part of the mask that fits against the face is called made of polyvinyl
the skirt. Most mask skirts are made of either clear or colored
chloride (PVC) or
silicone or black neoprene. The neoprene is generally less
expensive and is acceptable, but silicone usually lasts longer. other plastics.
Silicone also is a bit softer and more pliable and will more easily
fit the contours of the face. A double skirt will provide a better
fit for more comfort and less leakage.
swimming 53

--- Page 56 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
Be sure the mask covers the nose but does not cover or
interfere with the mouth. The mask should have an exposed nose
piece (“nose pocket”) or pinch holes for the nose. This allows
you to equalize pressure in your ears easily with one hand. Some
masks feature a purge valve on the nose pocket or faceplate for
clearing water from the mask. However, such valves tend to leak
and easily malfunction. They are not needed, because a diver can
To prevent fog- easily remove water from the mask without these. A good mask
also needs a noncorrodible band that holds the lens securely
ging, keep the
in the skirt and a split, adjustable head strap, which prevents
inside of your slipping and is much more comfortable.
If the mask has all the features recommended above, then
lens clean and
the deciding factor on selection is fit. To check the fit of the
use a commercial mask, place it against your face without using the strap and
inhale lightly through your nose (be sure no hair is trapped
no-fog spray.
between skin and skirt). The mask should seal against your face
Other substances, and feel secure with no air leakage. If air leaks into the mask,
try other styles and sizes until you have a no-leak fit. If a mask
such as saliva,
leaks air, it will leak water.
can reduce Before putting on the mask, adjust the strap. Undo the strap
fogging, but none locks, or “keepers,” and move the strap a notch at a time with
your finger. Do not grab the loose end or middle of the strap and
works as well as
try to pull it tighter or looser. If the mask fits properly, the strap’s
the no-fog spray. only job will be to hold the mask in place. Tightening the strap
is not recommended to stop leaks. Doing so will further distort
the skirt and cause additional leakage.
The Boy Scouts of America now has a Scuba
Diving merit badge. Explore this exciting under- SCUBA
water sport, and you will learn about the history
DIVING
of scuba, how to dive safely, and how to expand
your diving skills. You will also discover what is
necessary to adjust your body to the underwater
world, and much more.
54 swimming

--- OCR from Page 56 Image 2 ---
J
3A.

--- Page 57 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
With the strap properly adjusted, there are a couple of ways
to put on the mask. One way is to put the mask over your face,
inhale lightly to hold it, and then use both hands to slip the strap
gently over your head and into place. You also may reverse the
process by putting the strap in place and then, while holding the
strap in place with one hand, pulling the mask forward
and down into position over your face. Have your
buddy examine the mask to be sure no hair is
under the skirt, the straps aren’t twisted, and
the skirt is properly fitted.
The snorkel
Snorkels come in many designs, but all fea-
ture an oblong, curved rubber mouthpiece
with a T-shaped tab molded on each side of
the air hole. The longest part of the
J-shaped tube is 10 to 14 inches long and
may have a slight bend toward the head.
The tube should be about 3⁄
4
inch to
1 inch in diameter. A snorkel should not be
more than 14 inches long or less than 3⁄
4
inch in diameter. You can use your thumb to
determine if the snorkel is the proper diame-
ter for you. Insert your thumb into the open
end of the snorkel. If your thumb fits, the snor-
kel is the correct diameter for you. If your thumb
is too big to fit inside, choose a snorkel with a
larger diameter. The mouthpiece of your snorkel also
may contain a purge valve, a one-way valve that allows
water to drain out of the snorkel at its lowest point.
swimming 55

--- OCR from Page 57 Image 5 ---
also
allows
int.

--- Page 58 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
There are several ways to attach the snorkel to the mask
strap. A snorkel holder, or keeper, usually comes with the
Simply slipping snorkel. Two common types of keepers are a rigid tube clip
that attaches to the mask strap and a rubber strip that loops
the tube under
around the snorkel tube and under the mask strap. Securing
the strap may the snorkel to the mask strap prevents loss and adds comfort.
With the snorkel attached to the mask, place the curved flare
change the
of the mouthpiece between your lips and gums while you bite
mask fit and put gently on the tabs to hold it in place and keep it watertight. While
the snorkel at floating or swimming facedown on the surface, breathing through
the snorkel’s mouthpiece should be easy and natural. When you
an uncomfortable
are ready to dive, inhale deeply and hold your breath until you
angle. have completed your dive and have returned to your facedown
position at the surface. Of course, the snorkel tube will fill with
water during your dive. You cannot resume breathing until it is
cleared. This is why you need to hold your breath until
your dive is completed. Once your snorkel tube is above
the surface, simply exhale sharply to “blast” the water
from the tube.
An alternative method for clearing the snorkel is the
displacement method. While coming up from your dive,
look up so that the snorkel points down. As your face-
plate breaks the surface, exhale and roll forward to the
facedown position. This should clear the snorkel with a
little less effort than the “blast” and avoids the surfacing
“blowhole” effect.
Snorkeling Kicks
The kicks used in snorkeling
are the flutter kick and the
dolphin kick. You may use
the flutter kick both on the
surface and underwater.
The kick should flow
smoothly and slowly from the hips to the toes of the fins. The dolphin kick
is useful for short bursts of speed while swimming underwater or coming
up from a dive. To do the dolphin kick, hold your legs together and move
them in an up-and-down motion with your toes pointed as in the flutter
kick. The leg action helps propel you through the water.
56 swimming

--- Page 59 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
The Fins
Swim fins are wedge-shaped, flexible devices
worn on the feet to add more power to the kick.
When wearing fins while swimming and diving
with a snorkel, you usually won’t need to do
an arm stroke.
When choosing a pair of fins, comfort
is very important. Comfort is a function of
fit, blade (the paddlelike front of the fin),
length, and blade tension. The foot
pocket should hold the foot comfortably
and snugly. For the beginner or casual
snorkeler, a relatively flexible blade of
moderate length (24 inches maximum)
is recommended.
A full-foot fin has a soft rubber foot pocket.
It fits like a shoe over the bare foot. Open-heel
adjustable fins also are available, but you may
need to buy neoprene boots for a comfortable fit.
The Vest It is best to put
The vest is a flotation safety device that is not required for on the fins while
snorkeling in confined areas of clear water with a 12-foot
sitting on the dive
maximum depth, such as a swimming pool. However, you
should use a properly fitted vest for open-water snorkeling platform of a boat
or when snorkeling in water deeper than 12 feet. It should fit
or at the water’s
over your head and have a back strap or crotch strap to hold
it in place. A snorkeling vest also must have a way to add and edge, where you
release air to adjust the buoyancy.
can slide into the
The most common inflation feature is a short tube attached
to the upper portion of the vest that you can reach easily with water without
your mouth. A valve in the tube allows you to inflate the vest having to stand up
by blowing into the tube or to deflate it by manually triggering
or walk. Walking
a valve release. Some vests also have a compressed air cartridge
for emergency use. in fins is a good
The vest is not simply an emergency device. By partially
way to fall and
inflating the vest, you can adjust your floating or swimming
position on the surface, gain extra buoyancy, and make hurt yourself.
swimming easier for longer periods or distances.
swimming 57

--- OCR from Page 59 Image 1 ---
SNORKELING AND SCUBA

1, flexible devices
‘e power to the kick.
vimming and diving
won't need to do

f fins, comfort
a function of
t of the fin),
1e foot
‘omfortably
or casual

- blade of
naximum)

‘rubber foot pocket.
re foot. Open-heel

lalil~ kayat t3eaqowmeay:

--- OCR from Page 59 Image 2 ---
evices
the kick.
d diving
to do

t pocket.
en-heel
yu may
ortable fit.

It is best to put

t is not required for on the fins while

--- Page 60 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
BSA Snorkeling Safety
BSA Snorkeling Safety is the recommended procedure for
conducting BSA swimming activities using masks, fins,
and snorkels. Since snorkeling is a swimming activity,
Safe Swim Defense guidelines apply. The BSA Snorkeling
Safety clarifies and builds upon Safe Swim Defense
concepts to situations encountered during training and
open-water snorkeling.
1. Qualified supervision. All swimming activity, including
snorkeling, must be supervised by a mature and con-
scientious adult age 21 or older who understands and
knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-being and
safety of the youth members in his or her care; who is
experienced in the water and confident of his or her
ability to respond in the event of an emergency; and
who is trained in and committed to compliance with the
eight points of BSA Safe Swim Defense.
An experienced snorkeler must supervise snorkel-
ing instruction and open-water snorkeling activities.
At a minimum, the supervisor must possess skills and
knowledge matching the Snorkeling BSA Award, and
have experience with environments similar to those of
the planned activity. The supervisor is responsible for
compliance with each point of BSA Snorkeling Safety.
Unit leaders may rely on the expertise of other adults
to supplement their knowledge and training. They may
delegate the task of supervision, for example, when the
unit is participating in a snorkeling activity conducted by
a tour operator, provided they are satisfied that the oper-
ator’s training and experience will provide a safe activity
with appropriate safeguards.
2. Physical Health Review. A complete health history
from physician, parent, or legal guardian is required
of all participants as evidence of fitness for snorkeling
activities. Participants should be asked to relate any
recent incidents of illness or injury just prior to the
activity. Supervision and protection should be adjusted
58 swimming

--- Page 61 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
to anticipate any potential risks associated with indi-
vidual health conditions. Recent sinus or ear infections
may temporarily preclude surface dives while snor-
keling. Those with known adverse reactions to stings
from marine life, or with chronic conditions such as
diabetes or asthma, may need special medications at
hand. Adults with known risk factors for cardiovascu-
lar disease should not undertake strenuous activities
without the advice of their physician. In the event of any
significant health conditions, a medical evaluation by a
physician should be required by the adult leader.
3. safe Area. Training in the use of snorkeling equipment
shall be performed in clear water in a confined area
that conforms to Safe Swim Defense guidelines. “Clear
water” implies pool-like visibility. At a minimum, an
8-inch disk with white and black quadrants at a depth
of 8 feet should be recognizable from above the surface.
“Confined area” denotes either a pool or an established
summer camp swimming area with direct access from
the shore or a dock.
Safe conditions for open-water swimming and snor-
keling depend on water clarity, area definition, depth,
access, and other environmental factors. Snorkeling is
limited to clear water. “Open water” denotes a tempo-
rary swimming area of flexible extent in a natural body
of water that may not be close to shore.
An open-water snorkeling area need not have
physical boundary markers, but the activity should
be restricted within a specified distance of a point on
shore, an anchored vessel, a moving rescue craft, or
a float with a dive flag attached. Generally, a 50-foot
radius is recommended, and may be dictated by local
regulations concerning the use of a dive flag. The area
covered by the snorkeling group should be small
enough to allow rapid assistance from rescue personnel.
Emergency response places limitations on safe water
depth as well as water clarity and area. Response per-
sonnel should be able to quickly and easily reach the
swimming 59

--- Page 62 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
bottom, and locate, recover, and transport a submerged
victim to shore or vessel. At the start of the activity, and
periodically if the group moves along a reef or other
feature, the response personnel should check their abil-
ity both to see and to reach the bottom. The group
should be directed toward shallower water when-
ever the responders experience any difficulty.
(Twelve feet is designated as a reasonable
maximum depth in Safe Swim Defense.
In practice, slightly shallower or deeper
depths may be appropriate. Different
personnel will be able to easily recover
objects from different depths, particu-
larly if wearing fins. The practical way to
confirm a safe depth is to test that the
bottom is within comfortable reach of all
designated rescue personnel.)
Limited or distant access to the
snorkeling area may require additional
consideration. Underwater features close to
a sloping beach or near an anchored vessel are
ideal. If the snorkeling site is a considerable distance
from a beach or permitted anchoring location, the ability
to rest becomes important and may restrict the activity
close to shallow water or dictate the use of inflatable
vests and/or small response craft. Tide tables should be
consulted in areas with large tidal changes, especially
when beach access is at the base of a cliff. Snorkeling
in a river may require an exit point downstream of
the entry.
Snorkeling should not be done if water depth, clarity,
or temperature, boat traffic, waves, current, weather,
marine life, or bottom conditions, including vegetation,
are deemed unsafe by the qualified supervisor. Time in
the water should be adjusted based on water tempera-
ture and sun exposure. Snorkeling at night is limited to
lighted pools unless the activity is conducted at a BSA
nationally accredited high-adventure base.
60 swimming

--- OCR from Page 62 Image 1 ---
ly MOUT LO .
should
evel
(T
|

SI

/ +
con
b a slopi

--- Page 63 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
4. Proper Equipment
a. All snorkeling equipment shall be properly fitted
and in good repair.
b. The use of inflatable snorkeling vests and personal
flotation devices is at the discretion of the quali-
fied supervisor based on local conditions and the
abilities of the participants and responders. Use
of individual flotation devices is required in open
water whenever there is a noticeable current or
swells, when the bottom is not visible from the sur-
face (due to vegetation or limited visibility beyond
8 feet), or when the activity is an extended distance
(more than 50 yards) from shore or craft.
c. A dive flag should be used at all open water sites.
It may be displayed from a dive boat or attached to
a float and towed with the snorkeling party. Local
rules and regulations may specify the type of flag
and how close snorkelers must stay to it.
d. Protective clothing may be worn. Gloves are
appropriate in areas with sharp rocks or encrusted
structures. A shirt or a diver’s body suit will provide
limited protection from sun, abrasion, or coral burns
and minor insulation in warm water. In temperate
water, a partial or full wet suit may be worn. Weight
belts may not be used.
e. Lifesaving equipment in good repair shall be ready
for immediate use by response personnel. A flota-
tion device is recommended, such as a rescue tube,
bodyboard, or PFD, supplemented, as appropriate,
by reaching and throwing devices, and small craft.
Dive boats should be equipped with radios and
first-aid kits, and should deploy a safety line.
5. Response Personnel. It is the responsibility of the quali-
fied supervisor to designate personnel for emergency
response whenever lifeguards are not provided by a
facility or tour operator. The snorkeling party should be
divided into groups of two to eight swimmers with two
responders, paired as buddies, assigned to each group.
swimming 61

--- Page 64 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
(Units may be divided by patrols or crews.) The respond-
ers should be competent swimmers with basic water
rescue skills. Emergency procedures, including entries,
exits, and the role of everyone in the group, should be
reviewed and practiced prior to the activity using rescue
aids at the site.
The responders should be stationed either afloat
or ashore where they can see and hear all those in
their group. Neither the responders nor the swimmers
should face into the sun to see the other. Snorkelers in
a group should remain off the same side of a vessel.
Inflatable or rigid dinghies with oars are appropriate
response craft. The responders and snorkelers should
remain close enough for rapid rescue, generally within
50 feet of one another. In some situations, the qualified
supervisor may deem it appropriate for the responders
to tow rescue aids while accompanying their group in
the water.
Responders are responsible for surveillance as
well as rescue. If there is more than one group, then
a separate lookout, who may be the qualified supervi-
sor, should coordinate the entire activity and monitor
changing conditions. The lookout should have audible
or visible means, such as an air horn or flag, to recall
all groups. If a boat is used to transport snorkelers to
the site, then at least one person should remain aboard
who knows how to drive the boat and use the radio. A
least one person in the party must be trained in CPR.
It is the combined responsibility of the adult super-
visor, the lookout, and the responders to know the
number of people in the water at all times and to make
frequent visible confirmations of that number. Buddy
boards and tags, or their equivalent, must be used to
account for everyone in the water.
6. Ability. Only those who have completed the Snorkeling
BSA requirements may participate in open-water snor-
keling. Scouts classified as beginners or nonswimmers
62 swimming

--- Page 65 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
may use snorkeling equipment in clear, confined
water of appropriate depth, as specified in Safe Swim
Earn the
Defense (points 3 and 6), during instructional swims
Snorkeling BSA
or during closely supervised recreational activity.
Training for the Snorkeling BSA Award is limited to swimsuit patch
Scouts and adults classified as swimmers.
by completing the
7. Buddy system. All participants in snorkeling activi-
requirements found
ties are paired as buddies. Buddies should check each
in your Boy Scout
other’s equipment prior to the activity and review
hand signals. During the activity, they should remain Requirements
close enough that they are constantly aware of their
book (current
buddy’s location and condition. Generally, buddies
year) or the
should take turns making breath-holding dives. That
is, one buddy remains at the surface, floating with his Snorkeling BSA
mask in the water while breathing through the snor-
application,
kel, and keeps an eye on the buddy who is down.
No. 19-176.
When the diver surfaces, both buddies check their
position relative to the group before moving on or
letting the other buddy dive.
The adult supervisor, lookout, or responders may
call buddy checks as needed to keep the buddies
together. Buddy checks may also be called to aid
communication. Buddy pairs should be instructed to
routinely watch for predetermined audible and visual
signals of a buddy check.
8. Discipline. Be sure everyone understands and agrees
that snorkeling is allowed only with proper supervi-
sion and use of the complete Safe Swim Defense
and BSA Snorkeling Safety standards. The applicable
rules should be presented and learned prior to the
outing, and should be reviewed for all participants
at the beginning of the snorkeling activity. Scouts
should respect and follow all directions and rules
of the adult supervisor. When people know the rea-
son for rules and procedures they are more likely
to follow them. Treatment should be strict and fair,
without favoritism.
swimming 63

--- Page 66 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
search and Recovery
When you surface A team of snorkelers can systematically search an area by slowly
moving forward, side by side on the surface, while looking at the
from a dive, have
bottom. When one snorkeler sees the search object or an area
one hand over that needs closer inspection, that snorkeler dives while the others
stay at their surface position so the diver can return to the search
your head to
line. A single snorkeler should search across the area and then
protect yourself return on a close parallel course, continuing back and forth until
the entire search area has been covered.
from objects on
If a search area has been covered by a search team or indi-
the surface. vidual without recovery, it should be covered again with a line
of search at a right angle to the first search. If the grid-pattern
search is unsuccessful, an alternative search-and-recovery
method should be considered.
scuba in scouting
Swimming underwater using a
Self-Contained Underwater
Breathing Apparatus (scuba) can
be great fun, but it also can be
dangerous and even fatal. However,
when proper safety precautions are
taken, scuba diving as a sport has
an excellent safety record.
This record comes mainly
from the quality training
programs developed by
the scuba-diving industry.
Scouting relies
on such training
to provide safe
scuba oppor-
tunities for
its members.
64 swimming

--- OCR from Page 66 Image 1 ---
Scouting

nderwater using a

cd Underwater

paratus (scuba) can
but it also can be

id even fatal. However,
safety precautions are
diving as a sport has
safety record.

omes mainly

lity training
veloped by
ring industry.

=
v

--- Page 67 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
introductory scuba
There are several levels of scuba training. Basic introductory expe-
riences are conducted in pools with a small group supervised by
a certified instructor. If you complete one of these courses, you
will get a taste of the sport under controlled conditions, although
such a course will not prepare or certify you to dive on your own.
Scuba BSA for qualified Scouts, Scouters, and Venturers is one
of those programs. Requirements are found in the Scuba BSA
brochure, No. 19-515. Slightly more advanced introductory
courses conclude with an open-water dive under close supervi-
sion. Open-water dives are not an option for Scuba BSA.
Open-water Certification
Open-water certification courses provide the training needed
for independent diving with a buddy and are normally required
before a person is allowed to fill or rent tanks. Numerous tour
operators and dive shops arrange group dive trips for people so
certified. Standard open-water certification is offered only to
those over a certain age. Junior diver certification is available
for those below that age. Scouts and Venturers age 14 or older
are approved to enroll in either standard or junior certification
programs as a Scouting activity.
swimming 65

--- Page 68 Text ---
snorkeling and scuba.
After obtaining open-water certification a diver may
pursue a number of underwater activities including under-
water photography, wreck diving, cave diving, cold-water diving,
and diver rescue. Divers with a sufficient number of logged
dives and additional training may qualify for a divemaster
rating. Divemaster is the minimum qualification needed by
the dive supervisor when certified divers engage in unit dives
during Scouting activities.
All scuba instruction must be conducted by certified
Get your parent’s
scuba instructors. Units that are interested in scuba training
permission can find Scout camps that offer training programs under the
high-adventure listing on the BSA Web site (http://www.scout-
before exploring
ing.org). The National High Adventure Florida Sea Base
scuba online. (http://www.seabase.org) offers scuba training and dive
programs. Training also may be arranged through the
agencies identified in the BSA Scuba Policy.
BSA Scuba Policy
Any person possessing, displaying, or using scuba
(self-contained underwater breathing apparatus) in
connection with any Scouting-related activity must
either be currently certified by, or enrolled in, a
training course authorized by the National
Association of Underwater Instructors
(NAUI), the Professional Association
of Diving Instructors (PADI), or
Scuba Schools International (SSI).
These agencies are recognized
by the Boy Scouts of America for
scuba training and instruction.
Alternatively, if PADI, NAUI, or SSI
training and instruction is not avail-
able, certification may be accepted
from other agencies that comply with
Recreational Scuba Training Council
(RSTC) guidelines, provided that such
acceptance has been expressly approved by the
BSA local council in consultation with the national BSA
Health and Safety Service.
66 swimming

--- OCR from Page 68 Image 1 ---
either be cl
trainin
Ass¢

--- Page 69 Text ---
.snorkeling and scuba
Cub scouts. Youth members in Cub Scouting are not
authorized to use scuba in any activity.
Boy scouts and Varsity scouts. The use of scuba is not
authorized for a BSA unit, except that registered Boy
Scout youth and leaders may participate in the Scuba
BSA program conducted by a certified dive instructor
in compliance with this policy. Scuba BSA is not a diver
certification program.
Scuba training programs may be a part of troop/
team activities for participants who are 14 years of age
or older. Members who meet the age requirement and
are properly certified may participate in group dives
under the supervision of a responsible adult who is cur-
rently certified as a dive master, assistant instructor,
or any higher rating from NAUI, PADI, or SSI. Student
divers must be under the supervision of a currently certi-
fied NAUI, PADI, or SSI instructor. (Leaders trained by
other RSTC agencies may be utilized with local
council and National Council approval.) No
exceptions to the BSA age requirement
are permitted. Scouts with a junior
diver certification may dive only
when accompanied by a buddy
who is a certified open-water
diver at least 18 years old.
Venturers. Scuba programs
may be a part of Venturing activi-
ties for participants who are 14 years of
age or older. Members who meet the age
requirement and are properly certified may
participate in group dives under the supervi-
sion of a responsible adult who is currently
certified as a dive master, assistant instructor, or any
higher rating from NAUI, PADI, or SSI. Student divers
must be under the supervision of a currently certified
NAUI, PADI, or SSI instructor. No exceptions to the BSA
age requirement are permitted.
swimming 67

--- Page 71 Text ---
.Diving
Diving
Diving is fun. Springboard diving is a good muscle builder and
teaches you to make your whole body work gracefully. Before
you try board diving, you will need to have mastered elementary
diving skills. And remember, always check the water before
any dive to make sure it is deep enough and there is nothing
in the way.
Elementary Diving
The steps in learning elementary diving are the kneeling start,
the bent-knee start, and the standing dive.
Kneeling start. Kneel on one knee and hook the toes of your
other foot over the edge of the pool. Bend forward with your
chin down toward your chest. Keeping your arms straight, place
them against your ears with your hands together. Lean forward
and slide into the water, always leading with your hands and the
top of your head. Push with your foot against the edge of the
pool. Straighten your body and legs and bring your feet together
as you go into the water. To return to the surface, point your
hands up and your body will follow.
Kneeling start
swimming 69

--- Page 72 Text ---
Diving.
After you have practiced the kneeling start a few times,
raise up from the kneeling position so that both knees are off
the deck. Keeping the formerly bent knee behind the edge of the
pool and the other foot near the edge, assume a running posi-
tion. With your arms and head in the same position as for the
kneeling start, bend toward the water. As you begin to fall
forward, push off toward the water. Bring your feet together
as you enter the water.
Bent-Knee start. Stand with your knees slightly
bent and your feet about 5 to 10 inches apart. Your
toes should be gripping the edge. Bend forward at
the waist with your chin toward your chest. Keep
your arms straight and placed against your ears. Fall
forward and enter the water 3 to 4 feet from the side.
As you fall forward, keep your chin down and push
up with your feet.
Bent-knee start
standing Dive. Stand with your legs
straight and your feet together. Bend
forward with your chin toward
your chest. Keep your arms
straight and place them against
your ears. Fall forward and
push upward to lift your hips
and give height to your dive.
Be sure to keep your
head down until after
you have entered the
water. Straighten your
legs and keep them
together until you are
beneath the surface.
Practice to improve
your form.
standing dive
70 swimming

--- Page 73 Text ---
.Diving
Long shallow Dive
The long shallow dive is performed with your body in a
streamlined, arrowlike position that allows you to enter the
water with great forward speed at a shallow angle. The dive is
usually performed from a standing position. It can be used for
fun and for informal racing starts. As in all diving, remember
that the water should be clear, of proper depth, and free of
dangerous obstacles.
Once you have learned
the standing dive, it is easy
to learn the long shallow
dive. Start with your feet in
a comfortable position on
the edge of the deck. They
should be 6 to 8 inches
apart with your toes grip-
ping the edge. Your knees
and hips should be flexed and your back almost parallel to the
deck. Let your arms hang down in a relaxed, loose fashion with
your head up and eyes focused on a point in the water about
two body lengths from the edge. Start the forward motion by
swinging your arms backward and up toward your hips. Allow
your heels to rise and your body to lean forward. Then immedi-
ately swing your arms down and forward, and straighten your
legs with a powerful thrust. Doing this will drive your body out
over the water in a position almost parallel to the surface.
During this flight, drop your head slightly to a point
between your outstretched arms, which should be angled
slightly toward the water. You should enter the water at a slight
angle. Do not allow your body to land flat on the water. It will
slow you down, and you could hurt yourself. Keep your arms
straight and your toes pointed, with your body in an arrowlike
position during the underwater glide. As the glide slows, start
kicking. This will bring you to the surface, where you can begin
a swimming stroke.
The long shallow dive is a recreational dive that also can
be used for lifesaving approaches and when you are racing for
fun. When you have learned this dive, you might be ready to be
coached for a racing dive. Racing dives should only be taught
by and practiced in the presence of an experienced swimming
coach. Never dive from racing start blocks unless you have been
properly trained and are supervised.
swimming 71

--- Page 74 Text ---
Diving.
Plain Front Dive From springboard
Springboard diving involves a proper starting position and
If you have never
approach to the end of the board, a hurdle or jump, a takeoff
been on a board from the board, flight in the air, and the entry. Practice diving
from a board about 3 feet or 1 meter above the water. First, get
before, your
used to the extra height above the water by practicing a simple
instructor may standing dive from the end of the board the same way you did
have you first at the edge of the pool.
The next step is to learn the approach and hurdle. Most div-
practice with
ers use three steps before the hurdle. Your instructor may have
a simple you first learn the approach on dry land before moving to the
board. Practice on land with a line to represent the end of the
feetfirst entry.
board. This exercise also will allow you to judge how far from
the end of the board you should start.
Take the first step with your jumping leg—the leg that gives
you the most power when you jump from it. Keep your head up
and focus your eyes on the line on the deck or the end of the
board. Your second step follows your first. Let your arms swing
naturally at your sides as if you were walking down the street.
Take the third step with your jumping leg. This step should be
about a foot longer than the first two. The lengthened stride will
help change your forward motion into upward motion.
As your weight moves over your jumping leg, start your
hurdle. Swing your arms forward, lifting the opposite knee at the
same time. Then drive up from the board with your jumping leg.
Bring both arms over your head, keeping the toes of both feet
pointing down. When you reach the peak of your hurdle, move
your arms out to the side and straighten both legs together with
your toes pointed as you drop to the end of the board. Let your
toes hit just before your heels so you will land softly. Allow your
arms to sweep down slightly behind you, pass next to your hips,
and start forward. At the same time, bend your knees a little and
lift your head until you are looking across the pool.
72 swimming

--- Page 75 Text ---
.Diving
As the board starts to spring up, push high into your dive
and lift your arms over your head. Use your whole body to dive
over an imaginary crossbar located at eye level about a foot in
front of the board. Clasp your hands and duck your head, ready
for the entry. Aim straight for the bottom, with legs together and
toes pointed until you are entirely beneath the surface.
Diving safety
Scouting has specific guidelines for safe diving and elevated
water entry. “Diving” refers to any water entry in which the feet
do not make first contact with the water. “Elevated entry” refers
to any water entry from a height more than 18 inches above the
water. BSA Safe Swim Defense guidelines do not permit diving
or swimming activity of any kind in water deeper than 12 feet.
No elevated entry is permitted where the person must clear any
obstacle, including jumping or diving over land.
In water with less than 7 feet of unobstructed depth, div-
ing is not permitted and water entry must be feetfirst. A leaping
entry is recommended where water is at or above head level. A
step-down or jump-down entry from a sitting position is recom-
mended for shallower water. Never attempt to plunge headfirst
below waves at a beach.
Diving is permitted in clear water more than 7 feet deep
from a dock, pier, or platform that is no more than 18 inches
above the water surface. For elevated diving from a height
between 18 and 40 inches, the water must be unobstructed
and at least 10 feet deep. The water must be clear enough to
enable supervisory and lifeguard personnel to see the diver at
the deepest part of the plunge. Diving always
Board diving is permitted only from boards that are mounted
should be done
on a fixed (not floating) platform or deck, no more than 40 inches
(approximately 1 meter) above the water surface. Clear water straight ahead
depth below the board should be 10 to 12 feet. A lifeguard or
from the board,
supervisor should be positioned where the diver can be seen at
all times beneath the surface. There should be no other surface never to the sides.
or underwater activity or obstruction for at least 15 feet on either
side of the board and 25 feet in front of the board.
Any elevated entry from a height greater than 40 inches
must be feetfirst and only from a fixed platform or solid footing
no higher than the person is tall. Clear water depth should be 10
to 12 feet. Other protective measures and distances are the same
as for board diving.
swimming 73

--- Page 77 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
Competitive Swimming
The swimming strokes you have learned in Scouting stress
energy conservation, safety, and function rather than speed.
In competitive swimming, however, speed is key. To swim at During very short
a competitive level, improve your physical conditioning and
races, such as
pay close attention to skills.
a 50-meter
Competitive strokes race, freestyle
To complete requirement 8b, you must demonstrate good form swimmers might
on one competitive swimming stroke. If you select the front
take only three
crawl, back crawl, or breaststroke, you already have a strong
basic stroke foundation and will need to make only a few breaths during
changes for racing form. If you enjoy the challenge of learning a
the entire race.
new stroke, you can master the unique butterfly stroke, which is
used mainly for competition and vigorous exercise.
Front Crawl or Trudgen
There are only a few differences between
the front crawl stroke and competitive crawl,
or “freestyle,” stroke. Depending on the
length of the race, a competitive freestyle
swimmer may use different beats for the
flutter kick. For short races, sprinters
prefer the six-beat kick. However, for
long distances you may find that a
two-beat kick or the trudgen scissors
kick is more energy-efficient. You also
can change the breathing rhythm so that
instead of breathing every one, two, three,
or more strokes on the same side, you
breathe on one side and then the other. This
alternating breathing style allows for a breath
once every one-and-a-half arm cycles.
swimming 75

--- Page 78 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
Backstroke (Back Crawl)
In backstroke competition, swimmers push off on their backs and
continue swimming on their backs throughout the race. The form
for the racing backstroke is the same as for the form used when
not in competition. However, the start requires the use of a start-
ing block so that you can lift yourself out of the water while
leaving your toes underwater.
Opportunities for a Career in Swimming
People who enjoy swimming-related activities and who have a passion
for swimming might be surprised at the career opportunities this sport
has to offer. In addition to coaching (swimming, diving, water polo, and so
on) and private instruction at the recreational, amateur, and professional
levels, there are opportunities as swim trainers; water aerobics instructors;
in management as aquatics directors and coordinators; in sports science,
and in many other aquatics-related fields. You might begin to explore
the possibilities through your merit badge counselor or career counselor
at school.
76 swimming

--- Page 79 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
Breaststroke
To change the basic breaststroke from an easy, restful, distance-
swimming stroke to a high-energy racing stroke, you leave out
the long glide and shorten the recovery phase. Leaving out the
long glide allows the stroke to be swum continuously. The
increase in the number of strokes per minute and the shortened
recovery phase make the racing breaststroke much more physi-
cally demanding than the basic stroke. At the beginning of the
recovery phase (when your hands are under your chin), shoot
them forward with great force and out over the water. Dive your
head under the water (to reduce drag and resistance) as your
arms reach forward and your legs do a whip kick.
swimming 77

--- Page 80 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
Butterfly stroke, side and front views
78 swimming

--- Page 81 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
Butterfly
The butterfly is the second fastest of the competitive strokes and
is used only in racing and for high-energy exercise. The stroke is
so named because both arms recover at the same time and give
the appearance of a butterfly winging through the air. The stroke
also is unique because it is the only stroke to use the dolphin kick,
a kick that looks like the powerful motion of a dolphin’s tail.
Kick. For the dolphin kick, you hold your legs together and
move both of them in an up-and-down motion at the same time.
Start by straightening your legs and bringing them together with
the toes pointed as in the flutter kick. Bend your knees as you
bring your feet forward and upward and drop the hips slightly in
the water. When your lower leg is at a 45-degree angle with
your body, begin the downbeat of the kick. Straighten your legs
as you would for the downbeat of the flutter kick. As your legs
kick down, your hips will lift. Your heels and feet should just
break the water’s surface.
Arm stroke. During the arm stroke of the butterfly, both arms
move together at the same time. Begin the arm pull with your
arms straightened and in front of your body and your palms fac-
ing outward. Your arms should be about shoulder width apart.
This is the catch position. Start the power phase by turning your
palms inward as your hands press downward. Bend your elbows
with the downward hand motion and bend the neck back,
bringing your head upward. Continue bending your elbows as
you bring your hands inward toward your body. As your arms
reach a 90-degree angle to your body, raise your head out of the
water. Your hands will be halfway through the pull.
swimming 79

--- Page 82 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
Allow your hands to continue their path backward as you
straighten your elbows. Continue until your arms are fully
The path that the straightened and your hands are alongside your upper legs. For
the recovery phase, bring your arms back to the front of your
arms follow in
body in a semicircular arc just above the water’s surface. Your
the butterfly hands, with the palms outward, will enter the water as you
stroke is called straighten your elbows to return to the starting position.
Breathing and Coordination. In the butterfly stroke, you per-
a keyhole or
form two dolphin kicks with each arm-pull cycle. Begin the first
hourglass pattern. kick by lowering your hips and starting the downbeat of the legs
as your hands and arms enter the water. Begin the second kick at
the halfway point of the arm-pull cycle. As your hands push
toward your feet, start the downbeat of the second kick and finish
as you lift your arms out of the water for the recovery.
Your body remains flat and facedown in the water, with
your hips staying within a few inches of the water’s surface. As
you move forward, keep your head in alignment with your body
and your face in the water with your chin tucked against your
chest. Slowly exhale underwater during the stroke so that you
can quickly inhale when your head naturally rises during the
first half of the power phase. Inhale by raising your chin out of
the water. Do not lift your shoulders or arch your back to raise
your head. Keep your head elevated just until your mouth clears
the water, but always keep the lower half of your chin in the
water. Take a breath while your arms are in the rear position. As
soon as you inhale, return your head to the water.
Typically, a swimmer takes a breath every other stroke
because breathing every stroke often slows down the
stroke. Some swimmers use the “two up, one down”
method of breathing. To try out this method, take a
breath for two successive strokes and then keep your
head in the water on the next stroke. Swimmers with
good lung capacity sometimes use a variation of this
method during sprints or toward the finish of a race
in which they breathe every third stroke. World-class
swimmers breathe so effortlessly that there is no real
difference in their speed between when they take a
breath and when they don’t.
80 swimming

--- Page 83 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
The Racing Dive
The racing start for freestyle, breaststroke, and butterfly must be
a dive from a standing position. Several techniques are used in
competitive swimming. For the racing start known as the “grab
start,” you grasp the front edge of the pool or starting block. In
this position, your center of gravity is as far forward as possible.
This shortens the time required for your body to move forward
from a stationary position to a position of forward motion. The
arms provide stability and help you keep your balance.
After entering the water, a brief gliding phase follows. In
freestyle and butterfly, you are allowed to do an underwater
flutter kick or butterfly kick. After swimming no more than
15 meters underwater, you must surface and begin the arm
stroke. In the breaststroke, you can take one stroke underwater
and allow both arms to pull down all the way to the legs. You
also are permitted to do a single downward dolphin kick followed
by a breaststroke kick before your head must surface and you
begin the breaststroke.
swimming 81

--- Page 84 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
On the signal to take your mark, bend
over and grasp the edge of the deck
with your toes and with your fingers
on either side of your feet. Bend your
knees slightly to set your hips high
with your weight directly over the
balls of your feet. Hang your head
comfortably between your shoulders
and look at your toes. straighten up
slightly until your arms lock.
On the “go” signal, bring your head
up sharply forward to begin the short
upward arc of your dive.
Quickly bring your hands forward,
keeping them below shoulder level
and reaching forward until your arms
are at their full length. Push off with
your legs and feet.
As quickly as possible, your head and
hands reach the highest point and
you begin to drive yourself out over
the water with a powerful leg push.
82 swimming

--- Page 85 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
As your feet leave the deck, keep the angle of your body nearly
horizontal to the water by keeping the hips in a high position.
Raise your legs up before your entry into the water. Drop your
head down between your arms so your ears are squeezed
between your upper arms. Keep your legs and feet together.
slice cleanly into the water with your hands. The rest of your
body should slip through the “hole” opened by your hands.
Keep your head tucked low to avoid slapping your face on the
water. Even the feet should slip through the “hole” without a
splash. glide just below the surface until you slow to swim-
ming speed, and then begin your stroke.
swimming 83

--- Page 86 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
Racing Turns
Competitive swimming events frequently involve two or more
laps, or pool lengths, so turns are an important racing skill.
Indeed, learning and practicing quick racing turns can be as
important to winning as mastering stroke skills. Turning methods
vary depending on the stroke. Most competitive swimming pools
have bottom and overhead markings, or turn targets, that let you
know when to begin your turn. However, these are not helpful if
you are not watching for them! Always practice swimming in
clear water and with your eyes open. A comfortable, well-fitted
pair of swim goggles is recommended for serious competitors.
Front or Crawl stroke Flip Turn
The preparation for this flip turn begins when you are about one
The crawl stroke stroke away from the side of the pool. When you reach this
point, do not recover your arm from the last stroke but let it trail
flip turn also is
at your side. Take one more stroke and leave that arm trailing at
referred to as your side when the stroke is finished. Both palms will be facing
down alongside your legs. Bend at the waist and tuck your chin
the tumble turn.
to your chest. Tuck up your legs and, leading with your head,
do a half somersault while pulling your palms toward your face.
Be sure to exhale air through your nose throughout the flip
turn to avoid getting water in your nose. You will flip over on
your back underwater (slightly on one side) with your feet against
the wall. Your toes will be pointing up or to the side. Your hands
should be above your head. Push off with your feet from the wall.
As you leave the wall, roll to a prone position, reach forward with
both arms, and glide underwater. As you surface and your glide
slows to swimming speed, begin stroking. Do not take a breath
until the second or third arm stroke.
84 swimming

--- OCR from Page 86 Image 1 ---
_a—

--- Page 87 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
swim until the head
passes over the
turn target.
Pull through, stopping
the hands at the thighs.
Reverse the arm motion
with palms down; bend
at the waist.
Tuck the legs, turn the
head, and somersault.
Roll to the prone
position, push off,
and glide underwater.
swimming 85

--- Page 88 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
Backstroke Flip Turn
The backstroke flip turn is now used for all
serious competition. Since swimmers can-
not see the wall behind them while doing
the backstroke, competitive pools have flags
hanging 5 yards from the end of the pool to
warn the backstrokers. Practice first to fig-
ure out how many strokes it takes you to
swim from the flags to the wall.
Start the flip one stroke from the wall
by turning your head and looking toward
your pulling arm as it does the catch. As
you pull, rotate onto your stomach, drive
your head downward, and stop your pulling
hand at your hips. At the same time, your
other arm recovers across your body, enters
the water in the same position as in the
front crawl, and then pulls to the hips.
Start the somersault while tucking
your knees tightly to your chest. Turn both
palms toward your body and sweep them
toward your head to complete the flip.
Exhale air through your nose throughout
the flip turn to avoid getting water in your
nose. Keep your legs tucked until your feet
contact the wall, toes pointed upward. If
you have done the flip correctly, you will
be on your back. Push off forcefully and get
into a streamlined position as you leave the
wall. After you are clear of the wall but still
underwater, do several quick dolphin kicks.
You are permitted to go as far as 15 meters
before having to surface and take a stroke.
86 swimming

--- Page 89 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
Breaststroke and Butterfly Turns
When your head passes the turn target (about 5 feet out),
complete the stroke in progress and glide with your arms
outstretched until both hands touch the wall. If the pool edge
provides a handhold, grab it and pull into the wall. Pull in
quickly, tucking your knees tightly under you as you switch
directions and turn sideways.
If the wall has no handhold, tuck your
legs under you and switch directions while
turning sideways. Your knees will remain in
a tucked-up position as you plant your feet
on the wall. As your feet come under you
toward the wall, your head will lift out of
the water. Take a quick breath before your
head goes back in the water.
As you turn sideways, your top arm
will be pointing away from the wall. You
may bring this arm in close to the body
as you reverse directions by bending the
elbow and bringing in the hand or you may
leave it out in front. When your feet are
moving under your body and your head is
switching directions, bring your hand and
arm away from the wall, out of the water,
and over the top of your head. Submerge
yourself and push off the wall with your
hands and arms out in front of you. As you
leave the wall on your side, turn to a face-
down position.
If you are doing the breaststroke, you
can take one stroke underwater after push-
ing off the wall, using both arms to pull
down all the way to the legs. You also are
permitted to do a single downward dolphin
kick followed by a breaststroke kick before
your head must break the surface and you
begin the arm stroke. If you are doing the
butterfly, you are allowed to do dolphin
kicks for a maximum of 15 meters under-
water. Then you must surface and begin
the arm stroke.
swimming 87

--- Page 90 Text ---
Competitive swimming.
Crawl stroke Open Turn
The crawl stroke open turn is useful for swimming laps or for
competitive swimmers who have not yet learned a flip turn. It is
very similar to the turn for the breaststroke and butterfly.
However, it is not used in serious competition.
When about 5 feet from the wall, or when positioned
over a turn target, pull through to the end of an arm
stroke, roll onto your side, and glide with your
lower arm fully straightened. As your forward
hand touches the wall, absorb the momen-
tum by placing the palm flat against the
wall. Allow your elbow to bend, keeping
your forearm between your head and
the wall. As the elbow bends, remain
on your side and tuck both knees up
to your chin.
If the pool edge provides a hand-
hold, grab it and pull into the wall. Tuck
your knees tightly under you as you
reverse directions while still on your side.
As your feet come under you toward the
wall, your head will lift out of the water.
Take a quick breath before your head goes
back in the water. As you glide into the wall,
your top arm will be pointing away from the wall.
When you turn to reverse direction, you can
tuck the top arm close to the body by bending the elbow
and bringing in the hand or you can leave it out in front of you.
As your feet move to make contact with the wall and your head
and upper body move away from the wall, bring the arm on the
wall out of the water and over the top of your head. Submerge
yourself and push off the wall with both feet and the hands and
arms extended out in front of you. Turn to a facedown position
and move into a shallow underwater prone glide. Glide until
your speed slows to swimming speed, then begin stroking.
88 swimming

--- OCR from Page 90 Image 1 ---
over a turn
stroke,

--- Page 91 Text ---
.Competitive swimming
Begin in
a glide.
Touch the
wall and tuck.
Pivot the body
and inhale.
Arm over
in tuck.
Push off
and glide.

--- Page 93 Text ---
.swimming for Fitness and Health
Swimming for Fitness
and Health
Regular exercise may be the single most important
thing a person can do to live a long and healthy
life. Studies of people who live to great ages—
into their 90s and beyond—indicate that these
people have at least one thing in common:
regular, consistent exercise. While exercise has
a wide variety of benefits, the most remarkable
are the prevention of heart disease and the
strengthening of bones.
Exercise and Health
The relationship between exercise and heart disease has been
investigated extensively. The results are always the same: the
physically active have less heart disease. The impact of exercise
on heart disease is, in part, due to its beneficial effects on the
other risk factors of heart disease.
People who exercise regularly are much less likely to be
overweight because exercise burns calories. Exercise reduces
blood pressure, too. In fact, the combination of exercise and losing
weight often allows people with hypertension (high blood pres-
sure) to control it without taking medicines. This control may be
better than was possible with medicines. Research has shown that
active male joggers have lower total cholesterol than men of the
same age who don’t run. There is no substitute for exercise when
it comes to protecting your heart.
Without enough exercise, bones become demineralized. That
is, they lose their calcium and become brittle. If a person is put
to complete bed rest, this process starts almost immediately and
progresses rapidly. This is one reason why doctors recommend
that people who have had a major operation or a heart attack
resume activity as soon as possible.
swimming 91

--- Page 94 Text ---
swimming for Fitness and Health.
Exercise is an excellent cardiovascular conditioner and is
important to living better as well as longer. People who exer-
The demineralization cise regularly feel and look younger than those who do not.
Improvements in muscle tone and circulation undoubtedly help
of bones has been
physically fit people feel more energetic and give them a feeling
documented in of well-being. Moreover, research shows that healthy people are
astronauts returning more productive at work.
If the importance of exercise is so well-known and obvious,
from space, where
then why do people often neglect to exercise and protect their
lack of gravity robs health? The main reason is choice! Remember your Scout train-
ing and Scout Oath—what will be your choice?
physical activity of
its exercise value. making Exercise Part of Your Life
Weak and brittle How, when, and where you choose to exercise will depend on
bones—a result of such things as where you live; what facilities and equipment are
available to you; and your health, physical abilities, and training.
a lack of exercise—
But these things should determine only the type, place, and tim-
are also common ing of your exercise, not your basic decision to exercise. Some
people may go rock climbing. Others may take daily walks. For
in the aged.
some people the choices are almost limitless. For others the
choices may be fewer, but everyone can choose to exercise and
can gain from doing it.
For those who are limited by choice or circumstances to
one form of exercise, a full-body exercise is strongly recom-
mended. In full-body exercise, all the muscles and joints are
moved and flexed. Examples of full-body exercise include brisk
walking, running, cycling, rowing, and swimming.
swimming for Exercise
In many respects, swimming is superior to other forms of exer-
cise because it involves all the muscles and joints, is highly
aerobic, and has a very low injury rate. In addition, swimming
promotes coordination, and the buoyancy effect of water limits
stress to the joints. You can improve upper body strength by
working on overarm strokes, and focus on leg development with
kick drills and swim sprints using the flutter kick. It’s not sur-
prising that swimming is often prescribed and used as physical
therapy for paralysis, stroke, and injury victims. A regular swim-
ming exercise program will help you increase stamina, polish
your swimming skills, and develop an exercise program that you
can keep using as you grow older.
92 swimming

--- Page 95 Text ---
.swimming for Fitness and Health
Planning a swimming Exercise Program
Why not enjoy your favorite activity—swimming—
and get that ever-so-important exercise at the same
time? Simply plan and follow a regular swimming
routine, and you’ve got it.
The five parts of a fitness exercise routine
are warm-up, aerobic activity, strength building,
fl
w si
e
d a
x
e r
i
m s
b
t
i
r
l
o u
it
k p
y
e w
m
o i r
a
t h
i
b
n
r a
t
e
e
a s
n
l s
a
o t
n
s w t
c
r -
e
o p
,
k a
a
e c
n
. e
d
A d
c
5 g
o
0 r
o
e -y a
l-
a t
d
r a
o
d e
w
s ro
n
w b
.
i i m
Y
c
o
w
u
u s o
c
i r n
o
k
u
g o
l
u t
d
h t e
P
FFF
E
III
R
TTT
S
NNN
O
EEE
N
SSSSSS
AL
would be three or four 25-yard swim sprints using
an aggressive butterfly or crawl stroke with a
one- or two-minute rest between sprints. Follow
the sprints with a 300- to 500-yard swim using
a crawl or trudgen for a good strength workout.
To increase and maintain the flexibility needed
for almost every swimming activity, add a few
stretching/flexibility exercises to your warm-up
and cool-down routines before or after your time
in the water. For more information
The key to a successful exercise program is commit- on planning an exercise
program, refer to the
ment and consistency. If you regularly complete your full
Personal Fitness merit
swimming fitness routine three times every week, you
badge pamphlet.
will get the most from it. Participating even once a week
will make a significant difference. Less than once a week
is still better than being a full-time couch potato.
To help yourself make the commitment and develop self-
discipline, keep a detailed record of your exercise—how far you
swam, time in the water, strokes you used, comparative times,
and number of repetitions. These records will chart your progress
and show the improvement in your stamina and strength. Seeing
your own success will provide even greater incentive.
swimming is a Lifetime skill
Learning to swim a variety of strokes will provide relaxation,
fun, and physical conditioning that will benefit you the rest of
your life. When the skills acquired through proper instruction
and practice are adapted to lifesaving techniques, they can save
the lives of swimmers themselves, as well as others. And, of
course, swimming at a competitive level is always challenging.
Best of all, learning this lifetime skill will leave you with a sense
of accomplishment and a fun way to relax with your friends.
swimming 93

--- OCR from Page 95 Image 9 ---
Ne

--- Page 97 Text ---
.swimming Resources
Swimming Resources
scouting Literature Lenihan, Daniel J. Underwater Wonders
Boy Scout Handbook; Deck of First of the National Parks. Compass
Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket guide; America Guides, 1997.
Athletics, Emergency Preparedness, First Orr, Dan, and Eric Douglas. Scuba
Aid, Lifesaving, Personal Fitness, Sports, Diving Safety. Human Kinetics, 2007.
and Water Sports merit badge pamphlets
Thomas, David G. Swimming: Steps to
Success. Human Kinetics, 2005.
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail Web site at http:// Organizations and
www.scoutstuff.org for a com-
web sites
plete listing of all merit badge
American Red Cross
pamphlets and other helpful
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
Scouting materials and supplies.
Web site: http://www.redcross.org
UsA swimming
Books
Web site: http://www.usaswimming.org
Barsky, Steven M. The Simple Guide to YmCA of the UsA
Snorkeling Fun. Best Publishing Telephone: 312-977-0031
Company, 1999 Web site: http://www.ymca.net
Colwin, Cecil M. Breakthrough
Swimming. Human Kinetics, 2002.
Graver, Dennis K. Scuba Diving. Human
Kinetics, 2003.
Hines, Emmett W. Fitness Swimming.
Human Kinetics, 1999.
Laughlin, Terry. Extraordinary
Swimming for Every Body. Total
Immersion Swimming, 2006.
———. Total Immersion: The
Revolutionary Way to Swim Better,
Faster, and Easier. Fireside, 2004.
swimming 95

--- Page 98 Text ---
swimming Resources.
Acknowledgments Photo and illustration Credits
The Boy Scouts of America is grate- ©Jupiterimages.com—cover (mask,
ful to Richard Thomas (BSA Aquatics snorkel, fins, goggles, stopwatch,
Instructor; director, Aquatics section, butterfly swimmer in background);
National Camping School, Western pages 6–8 (all); 10, 11 (pool), 14
Region; chair, Aquatics Committee, (lifeguard shack), 65, 67–68, 77,
Grand Canyon Council) for his leader- 81, and 94
ship in coordinating the revision of the
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 75–76
Swimming merit badge pamphlet and
for developing this manuscript. Thanks Wikipedia.org/Mattias Wennström,
to BSA Health and Safety Committee courtesy—page 79
members David Bell, Ph.D., for his All other photos and illustrations not
indispensable assistance with the mentioned above are the property of
visuals and text; and to Calvin Banning or are protected by the Boy Scouts
and Patrick Noack for their input on of America.
visuals and text. These devoted volun-
John McDearmon—cover (diving
teers dedicated countless hours to this
illustration); all illustrations on
project. We also appreciate the input
pages 12, 14, 15–16, 18, 23–27, 31,
and contributions of the following: Lynn
33, 36–37, 39, 41, 43–44, 46, 49–50,
Brennard, Albert Cahill, Jay Fox, Bill
56, 69–72, 78, 82–83, 85–87, and 89
Hall, Matt Vande Sande, George Troxler,
and Steve Terrell. Brian Payne–pages 52 and 91
We thank the Quicklist Consulting
Committee of the Association for Library
Service to Children, a division of the
American Library Association, for its
assistance with updating the resources
section of this merit badge pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the following individuals
from the American Red Cross National
Headquarters for their assistance: John
E. Hendrickson, Program Management
and Field Support, Health and Safety
Services (and also a member of the BSA
Health and Safety Committee), and Mike
Espino, manager, Aquatics, Technical
Development and Research and
Product Development.
96 swimming

--- Page 99 Text ---
Merit badge library
Though intended as an aid to Boy Scouts, Varsity Scouts, and qualified Venturers in
meeting merit badge requirements, these pamphlets are of general interest and are made
available by many schools and public libraries. The latest revision date of each pamphlet
might not correspond with the copyright date shown below, because this list is corrected
only once a year, in January. Any number of merit badge pamphlets may be revised
throughout the year; others are simply reprinted until a revision becomes necessary.
If a Scout has already started working on a merit badge when a new edition for that
pamphlet is introduced, he may continue to use the same merit badge pamphlet to earn
the badge and fulfill the requirements therein. In other words, the Scout need not start
all over again with the new pamphlet and possibly revised requirements.
Merit Badge Pamphlet Year Merit Badge Pamphlet Year Merit Badge Pamphlet Year
American Business 2002 Engineering 2008 Photography 2005
American Cultures 2005 Entrepreneurship 2006 Pioneering 2006
American Heritage 2005 Environmental Science 2006 Plant Science 2005
American Labor 2006 Family Life 2005 Plumbing 2004
Animal Science 2006 Farm Mechanics 2008 Pottery 2008
Archaeology 2006 Fingerprinting 2003 Public Health 2005
Archery 2004 Fire Safety 2004 Public Speaking 2002
Architecture 2008 First Aid 2007 Pulp and Paper 2006
Art 2006 Fish and Wildlife Radio 2008
Astronomy 2004 Management 2004 Railroading 2003
Athletics 2006 Fishing 2009 Reading 2003
Automotive Maintenance 2008 Fly-Fishing 2009 Reptile and
Aviation 2006 Forestry 2005 Amphibian Study 2005
Backpacking 2007 Gardening 2002 Rifle Shooting 2001
Basketry 2003 Genealogy 2005 Rowing 2006
Bird Study 2005 Geology 2005 Safety 2006
Bugling (see Music) Golf 2002 Salesmanship 2003
Camping 2005 Graphic Arts 2006 Scholarship 2004
Canoeing 2004 Hiking 2007 Scuba Diving 2009
Chemistry 2004 Home Repairs 2009 Sculpture 2007
Cinematography 2008 Horsemanship 2003 Shotgun Shooting 2005
Citizenship in the Indian Lore 2008 Skating 2005
Community 2005 Insect Study 2008 Small-Boat Sailing 2004
Citizenship in the Nation 2005 Journalism 2006 Snow Sports 2007
Citizenship in the World 2005 Landscape Architecture 2008 Soil and Water
Climbing 2006 Law 2003 Conservation 2004
Coin Collecting 2008 Leatherwork 2002 Space Exploration 2004
Collections 2008 Lifesaving 2008 Sports 2006
Communication 2009 Mammal Study 2003 Stamp Collecting 2007
Composite Materials 2006 Medicine 2009 Surveying 2004
Computers 2009 Metalwork 2007 Swimming 2008
Cooking 2007 Model Design and Building 2003 Textile 2003
Crime Prevention 2005 Motorboating 2008 Theater 2005
Cycling 2003 Music and Bugling 2003 Traffic Safety 2006
Dentistry 2006 Nature 2003 Truck Transportation 2005
Disabilities Awareness 2005 Nuclear Science 2004 Veterinary Medicine 2005
Dog Care 2003 Oceanography 2009 Water Sports 2007
Drafting 2008 Orienteering 2003 Weather 2006
Electricity 2004 Painting 2008 Whitewater 2005
Electronics 2004 Personal Fitness 2006 Wilderness Survival 2007
Emergency Preparedness 2008 Personal Management 2003 Wood Carving 2006
Energy 2005 Pets 2003 Woodwork 2003
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA • SUPPLY GROUP
NatiONal diStribUtiON CeNter direCt Mail CeNter
2109 Westinghouse Boulevard P.O. Box 909
P.O. Box 7143 Pineville, NC 28134-0909
Charlotte, NC 28241-7143 For fast credit card orders—
VISA, MasterCard, American Express—
www.scoutstuff.org call BSA operators toll-free
1-800-323-0732

--- Page 100 Text ---
T
he Supply Group is
ready to be a partner
on your trail to
Eagle through high
adventure. The
adventure is yours,
and we are ready
with the gear you SWIMMING
will need. You can
depend on the latest
eagle scout
in lightweight,
durable, quality
gear that will
meet and surpass
your toughest
florida sea base
requirements.
www.scoutstuff.org
philmont scout ranch
SKU 35957
7 30176 35957 1
35957 2010 Printing
northern tier
erutnevda
hgih
ot
daor
eht
nO

--- OCR from Page 100 Image 5 ---
TAYNLNAIAGV HOIH Ol dvou JHL NO