
--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
How to Swim Faster: a Holistic Training Guide

--- Page 2 Text ---
SWIM LIKE A PRO
How To Swim Faster: A Holistic Training Guide
FARES KSEBATI

--- Page 3 Text ---
Copyright © 2021 by Fares Ksebati
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods,
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright law.
Edited and formatted by L. Austen Johnson

--- Page 4 Text ---
SWIM LIKE A PRO BONUS VIDEO COURSE
I truly believe that the best way to learn something is through multiple touch
points. That’s why I created an online video course that corresponds with this
book.
I have created a unique video for each chapter that will aid in your
learning. You’ll be able to see and hear my explanation for each concept and
stroke technique in this book. Seeing a visual representation of each concept
can make all the difference in how fast you make progress, so I highly
recommend you join the online course.
You can get started right away by visiting swimlikeapro.org or by
opening the camera app on your phone. Hold your phone over the QR code
below. Your phone will automatically direct you to the website where you
can follow the instructions to unlock all the video content.

--- OCR from Page 5 Image 1 ---
ONLINE COURSE

Mesa

SCAN THE CODE
SWIM

VIDEO LIBRARY

Q&E&A

--- Page 6 Text ---
PREFACE
A Love Letter To Swimming
T is unlike anything I’ve experienced in my
HE FEELING OF WEIGHTLESSNESS
life. When I’m swimming, it feels like I've entered a different world. It’s as if
I’ve been transported to another dimension. The world’s problems just
disappear, and I become one with the water.
It’s Magical.
When I first dive in, all my senses awaken, and I experience something
that transcends imagination. The water tingles along my skin, bringing my
senses to life. I hear the molecules of water echoing inside my eardrum as I
submerge below the surface. I can smell the water, fresh and natural, and
even get a little taste with my lips.
It’s truly a one-of-a-kind experience, and nothing else will engage all my
senses like the feeling of being in water. After all, we as humans are 60%
water, so it’s a bit like coming home. But there’s something more to this
experience than becoming one with the water, a medium that covers most of
the world’s surface area. There’s something about the feeling of
weightlessness that is special, and it is this feeling that is one of the many
joys the sport of swimming offers humanity.
Think of your body as a vessel. When you start to swim, every part of
your body works together to move your vessel forward. Some body parts and
energy systems work harder than others. Your heart beats faster to pump
blood to your muscles, while your stomach slows down because digestion is
no longer a priority.
After about two minutes, your body realizes that you’re not stopping
anytime soon and goes into aerobic respiration. Your body starts to supply
even more oxygen to your muscles. Your heart beats faster and stronger to

--- Page 7 Text ---
circulate this oxygenated blood through your body!
Our brains love swimming too! The extra blood and oxygen circulating
help you become more alert, awake, and focused. When we swim, our brain
releases endorphins, natural, “feel good” hormones. When you swim, your
mind can be just as engaged as your body, and as a result, your future self
will thank you.
There is no question that swimming is the best all-around form of
physical fitness for all. It’s the only form of physical activity that you can do
from cradle to grave. The water has no racial, national, or religious
boundaries. Young, old, rich, poor, from anywhere around the world, we are
all working towards the same goals.
Together we share a passion for the water. Whether you swim for sport,
physical fitness, or mental health, whether you swim in a pool, lake, river, the
sea, or the ocean, we are all in this together!
It’s that feeling of weightlessness, competitive spirit, and pushing
ourselves further and faster! It’s the positive endorphins we feel after
reaching the wall, crossing the finish line, or looking in the mirror knowing
you’re a badass for diving in and taking on the world!
This is why I swim!
Since my early childhood, I developed a great passion for the water. The
freedom and enjoyment we experience as swimmers is often hard to describe.
My experience in the water has empowered me to help others realize this
same feeling of freedom.
I believe through structured guidance, data, and social interaction, we are
all just one day away from realizing our full potential! Aquatic prowess is the
epiphany of reaching your full potential in the water.
In 2015, I launched MySwimPro, a fitness app to help swimmers all over
the world improve their performance and health. The idea for the app was to
have a personalized swim coaching experience at a fraction of the cost of
hiring a coach. MySwimPro has grown to over one million community
members. Our mission is to democratize swimming by making improvement
easier and more accessible to all swimmers.
Through the development of this global swimming business, I’ve had the
opportunity to speak with thousands of swimmers around the world about
their goals, fears, and dreams in the sport. I’ve interviewed dozens of
olympians, world record holders, and industry experts on everything from
strength training to nutrition.

--- Page 8 Text ---
I’ve written thousands of personalized workouts and training plans for
swimmers with highly diverse backgrounds and goals. The results are
absolutely incredible! From helping people lose over 100lbs to crossing the
finish line at their very first triathlon, the impact has been palpable.
Before launching MySwimPro, I coached both age-group and masters
swimmers. I truly enjoyed the opportunity to help people improve their
techniques and reach their goals. After the 2016 Olympic Trials, I
transitioned to coaching only masters swimmers to allocate more time to
growing MySwimPro. It’s an amazing experience to share the knowledge I
have gained as a former collegiate swimmer with people of all skills and
experience levels.
As a swimmer myself, I still compete in masters competitions, open water
races, and in triathlons. I’ve competed in the FINA Masters World
Championships, swam from Asia to Europe in the Bosphorus Cross
Continental swim, and am a 3x U.S. Masters swimming individual national
champion. I’m always on the lookout for the next swimming adventure, and
in this book, I’ll tie in relevant stories for added flavor and entertainment.
This book is the culmination of over a decade of on-deck coaching
experience, 20+ years competitive swimming knowledge, and over five years
building the largest digital swimming community in the world!
I am incredibly excited to package all this knowledge into one book that
takes a holistic approach to helping swimmers reach their goals. Please also
visit swimlikeapro.org for this book’s special online companion course that is
filled with instructional technique videos and other resources to help you
swim smarter.
This is THE most comprehensive way to swim faster and smarter than
ever before. There is only one question I have for you:
Are you ready to swim like a pro?

--- Page 9 Text ---
CONTENTS
Introduction
I. Warmup:
The Fundamentals
Chapter 1
What Happens to Your Body When You Swim
Chapter 2
The Physics of Swimming
Chapter 3
How to Write a Swim Workout
II. Main Set
Swimming Technique
Chapter 4
Technique 101
Chapter 5
Freestyle
Chapter 6
Backstroke
Chapter 7
Breaststroke
Chapter 8
Butterfly
Chapter 9
The 5th Stroke
III. Main Set II:
Out of the Water
Introduction
Chapter 10
Strength Training
Chapter 11
Injury Prevention
Chapter 12
Nutrition
Chapter 13
Mental Training
IV. Cool Down:

--- Page 10 Text ---
Swim for life
Chapter 14
Why We Swim
Chapter 15
How To Get Started
Chapter 16
My Gold Medal Moments
V. Appendices
Appendix I: Swimming Glossary
Appendix II: Frequently Asked Questions
About MySwimPro
About the Author
Swim Like a Pro Online Video Course
Get Custom Stroke Analysis & Coaching
Acknowledgments

--- Page 12 Text ---
INTRODUCTION
You feel it the moment you enter the water. Your heart pounds, your muscles
contract, and your lungs tighten up! A few minutes later, you’ve moved
beyond the initial temperature shock and floated into a world where
swimming is almost as comfortable as walking.
Throughout this book, I’ll share a methodology that has been used by
thousands of swimmers around the world to improve stroke technique and
swim more efficiently. I’ll walk you through a holistic approach that will
allow you to swim with less effort, swim faster, and swim with more
enjoyment than ever before.
If you’re just getting started in your swimming journey, this couldn’t be a
better time to start! The resources I’ll share in this book and the online course
will not only expose you to the fundamentals of technique training but also
the world of strength and conditioning, nutrition, and injury prevention.
Before we get started, I’d like to share with you the five core promises of
this book and my intentions behind them. Each promise is my commitment to
you. If you approach this book and the methodology I share with an open
mind, you will be in a significantly better position to take your swimming to
the next level.
P #1: A F P O S
ROMISE RESH ERSPECTIVE N WIMMING
Albert Einstein is widely credited with saying, "The definition of insanity is
doing the same thing over and over again but expecting different results." If
you want to maximize your potential in something, you must approach it with
a fresh perspective. Whether you’ve been swimming for 30 years or just

--- Page 13 Text ---
getting started, I promise that this book will help expand your outlook on
every aspect of swimming. We will start by self-reflecting on why you swim
and how to prioritize your goals and create a plan of action to reach them!
P #2: A D U S T
ROMISE EEPER NDERSTANDING OF TROKE ECHNIQUE AND
T
RAINING
Water is 784 times more dense than air! It is a medium that offers its own
unique physical challenges unlike anything we experience on land. For this
reason, we must take a scientific approach to understanding the physics of
how our body moves through the water. I promise to present to you a detailed
technical overview of all five strokes: freestyle, backstroke, breaststroke,
butterfly, and the underwater dolphin kick. Additionally, I will share
workouts and video demonstrations in the complementary online course.
P #3: A S S SMART G
ROMISE TRATEGY TO ET OALS
A goal without a plan is just a wish. If you make a wish to Santa to swim
faster, he may or may not deliver. You should still leave him milk and
cookies just in case. In this book, I promise to share drills, training guidance,
and a strategy to build on the technical knowledge for each stroke we discuss.
You will learn how to set SMART Goals that are specific, measurable,
attainable, and time-bound. You will put together an action plan and join a
global community of swimmers who are focused on improving their
performance and health!
P #4: A H A T S S
ROMISE OLISTIC PPROACH O WIM MARTER
If you want to swim faster, you have to swim more. This is false. Instead, I
will share how to swim smarter and incorporate both in-water and out-of-
water training to enhance your performance and make the most of your time.
We will discuss how these elements come together and why it matters if
you’re looking to take your swimming to the next level!
P #5: T B I
ROMISE O E NSPIRED

--- Page 14 Text ---
We all have our own unique motivations to swim. Perhaps you’re looking
to reach a personal best time, or maybe, you aspire to swim in an open water
race or triathlon. Maybe you’re looking to improve your stroke technique and
burn more calories. Regardless of your goal, you’re not alone. Swimming is
special. We have a global community of individuals who have achieved
incredible progress and made strides to what I like to call “Gold Medal
Moments.”
You don’t have to win gold to achieve something great! In this book and
supplemental video interviews, you will hear from people just like yourself
who are working towards their personal goals and finding success. I believe
that we are all just one step away from achieving our Gold Medal Moment.
We just need the right guidance, structure, and support to make it happen.
I can’t promise you’ll break a world record or hit a new PR, but with the
resources presented in this book and online course content, you’ll be well on
your way to swimming with more efficiency and greater confidence in the
water.
So how will we do this?
A Holistic Approach
I want you to think about your favorite high performance sports car.

--- Page 15 Text ---
Maybe you like exotic Italian supercars like Lamborghini or Bugatti. Perhaps
you’re a fan of classic American Muscle cars or new age electric. Regardless
if you fancy a Ferrari or a Tesla, all these automobiles have one thing in
common.
They’ve all been engineered to be the best at something while still being
great at everything else. Similarly, the best swimmers in the world share the
same fundamentals of stroke technique, training, and race strategy. The best
swimmers approach swimming from a holistic perspective in order to
optimize every element of the human machine. Fast cars and fast swimmers
have a lot more in common than you might think.
At the core of a car’s performance is the engine. An internal machine that
converts one form of energy into another for forward motion. When it comes
to swimming, we have the unique opportunity to train and develop our
engines. We can even make our engines more efficient to improve our range.
Instead of fuel economy, we have something called swimming economy, i.e.,
how efficient we are at swimming. Remember, we are a vessel moving
through the water. What good is a powerful engine if it’s not working
efficiently?
The fastest cars also have the least wind resistance. Similarly, as a
swimmer, it’s our job to decrease drag and limit our resistance with the water.
Unlike a car moving through air, we move through water, a medium that’s
800x denser than air.
When it comes to stabilizing the machine, just like a performance car,
you can’t load a massive engine on a weak frame. Similarly, we as swimmers
must have a strong core to hold our alignment in the water and support
forward progress.
Just like a car, some features are essential; others are not. The shiny rims,
heated seats, and carbon fiber accents are cosmetic features that might be
flashy, but at the end of the day, they’re simply just nice to have. In
swimming, you can think of these cosmetic features as your swimsuit color,
cap, goggles, and equipment.
There are so many possibilities to customize, but the core of the machine
is what’s on the inside. For the car, that’s the engine, transmission, chasis,
and internal computer system. For swimmers, this would be our stroke
technique, endurance, and knowledge of the sport.
By the end of this book, you’ll have the knowledge and know-how to go
on auto-pilot. But I don’t recommend swimming on autopilot. After all, the

--- Page 16 Text ---
fun of driving a car is being in the driver seat, and swimming is no different!
When you’re in the driver's seat, you’re in control. Let’s rev our engines
because this joy ride is about to start!
Book Structure
This book is broken up into four core sections that flow from one to the
other. We’ll start with the fundamentals of swimming by discussing the
physics of how to swim faster and how to structure a workout. Then, we’ll
dive (pun intended) into each major stroke with a full overview of the proper
mechanics. Each chapter in this section will share the proper technique for
the corresponding stroke along with supplemental online content that will
feature instructional video drills.
In the second half of the book, we’ll step out of the water to teach skills
that will supplement your swimming training. We’ll look at how to approach
swimming as a lifelong sport. I’ll share goal setting strategies, how to get
started, and personal stories from my swimming adventures around the
world.
A S L P ?
RE YOU READY TO WIM IKE A RO
Let’s dive in :)

--- Page 17 Text ---
WARMUP:
The Fundamentals

--- Page 18 Text ---
CHAPTER ONE
What Happens to Your Body When You Swim
W have five basic senses: touch, sight, hearing, smell and taste.
E AS HUMANS
Different parts of our body and the sensing organs associated with each sense
(like our tongues, for example) send information to the brain to help us
understand and perceive the world around us. In the water, we have a sixth
sense.
Yes, we all have a sixth sense, and I’m not talking about the 1999 thriller
movie starring Bruce Willis. Our sixth sense has more to do with body
awareness and our “feel” of the water. This feeling of connection with the
water is different than our sense of touch.
If you’ve been swimming for any consistent period of time, then you’ve
probably already developed a love-hate relationship with your feel of the
water. If you’re new to swimming, this is your opportunity to start this
relationship off on the right foot!
This is important because when we understand how our feel of the water
develops, we will have better insight into how to improve it. Having a greater
awareness of your touch, sight, hearing, smell, taste, and feel of the water
heightens your swimming experience. When you swim with all your senses,
you improve most quickly, swim more efficiently, and you feel more alive!
Finding your Swimming Zen
I’m not a Zen monk, nor do I plan to become one. However, we can learn
and gain insight in the way monks try to live their lives. Simplicity,
mindfulness, calm, peace. These are all principles we can learn from.
We can all learn to make our swimming more Zen-like by following a

--- Page 19 Text ---
few simple guidelines. One of these principles is simplicity–to do one thing at
a time. Do one thing, and do it slowly and deliberately. Do it completely.
In life, we often overwhelm ourselves with more than we can handle. In
swimming, unfortunately, we behave in a similar manner. There’s so many
things to think about in the water. Push off in streamline, point your toes,
blow bubbles out of your nose, keep your core tight, take a break out stroke,
don’t let your hips drop.
There are literally hundreds of small movements and decisions that you
can think about just from pushing off the wall and taking your first stroke.
Regardless of how many things you could be focusing on, the key to
improving is to simplify and focus on one skill at a time. In this book and
online course, you will read about and see hundreds of different techniques,
drills, and strategies.
If you try to apply all these skills at one time, you will most surely
become frustrated and give up. It’s important to take a systematic approach.
Lead with simplicity. Do less, space it out, designate time for mastering
certain skills, and think about what has the highest impact for you.
In order to find your swimming zen, it’s important to keep everything in
perspective and go with the flow. Remember, the water is 800x denser than
air. You can’t fight the water; you will surely lose. Instead, be patient, stay
positive, and try your best to enjoy the feeling of weightlessness.
“The water is your friend…..you don't have to fight with water, just
share the same spirit as the water, and it will help you move.” -
Alexandr Popov
S Z D :
WIMMING EN RILL
The next time you go to the pool, try this fun and simple drill. I’d like you
to enter the water feet first, fully submerge yourself so your entire body has
had a chance to get wet, including your head.
Next, I want you to focus on relaxing your body by focusing on lowering
your heart rate.
Focus on your breathing. Breathe in your nose, out your mouth. Don’t
hyperventilate, just breathe normally and calm your body. Think of this as a
meditative exercise to clear your mind. Then when you’re ready, drop your
face in the water and float on your stomach. Let your arms float where

--- Page 20 Text ---
they’re most comfortable, and try to get your chest and hips high in the water.
You may want to inform the lifeguard what you’re doing so they don’t
look over and have a panic attack when they see you floating on your
stomach in the shallow end! Assuming you’re able to float for a few seconds,
try to relax your body, clear your mind, and find your swimming zen.
"The mind is like water. When it's turbulent, it's difficult to see. When
it's calm, everything becomes clear." - Prasad Mahes
Body Awareness
Body awareness is the ability to recognize where your body is in space.
This could be on land or in the water. In the swimming world, a strong sense
of body awareness allows someone to time their final stroke into the wall at
the finish of a race or figure out at what point to somersault on the wall for a
freestyle flip turn.
Your muscles and joints send your brain information about your body and
how it moves through the water. You may wonder why good body awareness
is important to swimming fast. Body awareness helps us to understand how to
connect our body to the water.
It’s pretty easy to spot the level of a swimmer’s body awareness at the
pool. A beginner swimmer might take unnecessary strokes very close to the
wall or have an irregular breathing pattern. Both of these traits are very
common, and if this is you, no worries at all. We can change that by
improving our body awareness in the water.
Even for more advanced swimmers, improving body awareness can help
you swim faster, get a better more effective workout, and enjoy the sport
more. Body awareness develops quickly throughout childhood development
because research indicates that the multi-sensory foundations of the body
develop throughout early and mid-childhood.
If you learned how to swim as a teenager or adult, you can still learn and
develop these skills, it just takes time. The more time you spend in the water,
the more you’ll improve. So remember to be patient and focus on finding
your swimming zen!
Be one with the water!
Proprioception

--- Page 21 Text ---
Proprioception is the body’s mysterious ability to locate our limbs, in the
water or even in darkness. You could call it body sense or kinesthetic
awareness; it is the brain’s ability to sense the relative positions and
movements of our different body parts. Because of proprioception, you know
exactly where your hand is in space as you move it around, even though your
eyes are closed.
You can test your own proprioception to see how this works. Take this
book or any object and hold it out in front of you with both hands. Now close
your eyes. Continue holding the book out in front of you with one hand, and
use your other hand to touch your nose. Now return your hand back to the
book. Pretty easy, right?
Now let’s make things a bit more challenging. Repeat this process of
holding the book out in front of you and close your eyes. Touch your nose,
now instead of returning your hand to the book, touch the back of your head
and then give yourself a pat on the back. Now, without opening your eyes, try
to return your hand to the top of the book where you started…
It’s not as easy as you’d think. Good thing you patted yourself on the
back first, because you probably missed returning your hand to the book.
When we close our eyes, our sense of the world and our body’s place in it
doesn’t disappear. An invisible impression remains. This sense is what
proprioception is.
Like our other senses — vision, hearing, and so on — it helps our brains
navigate the world. Scientists sometimes refer to it as our “sixth sense.” As
you could tell from the last activity, you may or may not have been
successful at keeping your limbs in check while your eyes were closed.
This is because our brain maps our movements like the map of a road.
When you travel the same path over and over, a new mind map is created.
These maps are constantly being updated to reflect current demands. You can
instantly sense changes in your maps by doing a simple experiment.
Try to imagine or sense the exact shape and position of your ears. Now,
rub just the left ear for a few seconds and then compare your ability to sense
the left ear and the right. You will note that it is much easier to sense the left.
The simple reason is that touching the ear sent a signal to your brain, which
activated the map for that area. Of course, the additional clarity is only
temporary.
Similarly, when we swim, we create maps in our mind of how each stroke
is supposed to work. Everything from the timing of how our fingertips enter

--- Page 22 Text ---
the water to the way our muscles engage at each part of the stroke. We
reinforce our own habits without even knowing it.
This is why it’s so important to swim with proper stroke technique. Every
stroke we take is an opportunity to refine and reinforce our mental framework
for how to swim. In order to make long-term or permanent changes in the
maps, you need to consistently place demands on that map over a long period
of time.
For example, musicians actually have larger finger maps than other
people. When a certain body part or movement is used repeatedly in a
coordinated and mindful fashion, there are actual physical and observable
changes in the part of the brain that controls that body part or movement.
This is part of the reason why you get better at what you practice. Lack of
movement will reverse this process. If you fail to move in a certain way for a
period of time, you lose the ability to accurately sense and control that
movement. This is called sensory motor amnesia.
If we swim three to four times per week and then take an 8-week break
from swimming, the brain’s body map will become fuzzier and less clear.
We’ll feel as if we’ve “lost our feel of the water.” There are ways to limit this
impact and better maintain this feel of the water outside of the pool which
we’ll discuss in later chapters.
When it comes to improving our “feel of the water,” we must be
consistent in our approach. Developing our feel of the water takes time. It
even has a compounding effect that’s not linear. Each day we swim, and with
each stroke we take, we refine our mind and body’s connection with the
water.
Out of the water, we can maintain and even accelerate these mind maps
through functional dryland training. We’ll go in detail on how we can do this
in chapters nine and ten when we discuss swimming specific strength training
and injury prevention.
Whether you’re training in or out of the water, your rate of improvement
starts with your intention. In order to re-calibrate your neural network so you
can swim faster, you have to be willing to re-shape your approach. I advise
looking at each new skill and workout with a fresh perspective.
You must engage both your mind and body in the water. Use all your
senses to work together to help you reach your goals.
"The mind controls the body, and the mind is unlimited." - Craig

--- Page 23 Text ---
Townsend
All Your Senses
When we’re in the water, it's amazing how every muscle in our body is
sending information to the brain at the same time. Our nervous system
processes a massive amount of sensory data without any conscious work on
our part.
Just think what it takes to push off the wall in streamline. All the muscles,
from your fingertips to your toes, need to relay the right information at the
right time so you can keep all the bones of your spine in line. Next, in order
to start kicking in that position, you’ll need to engage muscles in your core
and legs at just the right timing to keep forward momentum. When you break
streamline for the first stroke, your hand connects with the water in order to
create forward propulsion for the rest of your body.
It’s amazing what the brain is capable of. We’ve already discussed our
“sixth sense,” but we skipped over the core five that we’re most familiar
with, our senses of touch, sight, smell, hearing, and taste. All of these are
important in swimming.
Touch
The average person has nearly 20 million skin cells on their body. When
we go swimming, we get nearly 20 million interactions with the water all at
the same time! That’s insane!
If you ask anyone what sense is most engaged during physical activity,
they would most likely say the sense of touch. I would agree! Our sense of
touch is our primary connection to the water. It goes deeper than the surface
(pun intended) of our skin, all the way to engagement on a neuromuscular
level.
Sight
"The eyes are the window to your soul." - William Shakespeare
I think Shakespeare was trying to be deep with that quote, but in all
reality, our eyes do offer us the opportunity to connect with the world around

--- Page 24 Text ---
us. Our visual memory describes the relationship between our perception of
what we see in the present moment and how it relates to what we’ve seen in
the past.
If we imagine ourselves in the water, just think of everything we see and
how it relates to our swimming—he transparency of the water, the depth of
the bottom, where the backstroke flags are: There are so many visual cues we
use to orient ourselves at the pool or in open water.
Smell
The next time you’re at the pool or beach, pause and take in the scent of
your environment. It may sound primitive, but it will open not just your
nostrils but your mind, too. The sense of smell (called the “olfactory” sense)
is closely linked with memory, probably more so than any of our other
senses. The scent of chlorine conjures up recollections of a childhood
summer swim team practice, for example.
Hearing
While our echoic memory only lasts 2-4 seconds, we immediately
become aware of familiar sounds that we hear. Similarly to our sense of
smell, our hearing is highly associated with long-term memory. Hearing the
sounds of the ocean, a starting beep at a swimming competition, or even the
sound we make when we push off the wall and blow bubbles out of our nose
can all connect us to the water.
Taste
If you’ve been open-water swimming, you know the clear difference in
taste between a salty sea or ocean and a fresh-water lake. You don’t have to
actually drink the water you swim in to know what it tastes like, and let me
be very clear, DO NOT drink the water that you swim in! Now that we’ve
gotten that out of the way, the sense of nostalgia associated with these
different tastes can have a large impact on how we interpret the environment
we’re in.
By using all our senses, we can not only gain a greater appreciation for
the water but also become more mentally and physically engaged with a
workout. The more in tune we become with our environment and senses, the
faster we can create mind maps that will improve our performance in the

--- Page 25 Text ---
water.
Now that we understand how all our senses can work together, let’s
discuss the physics of swimming so we can swim faster and smarter than ever
before!
"When you change the way you look at things, the things you look at
change" - Max Planck, the father of quantum physics

--- Page 26 Text ---
CHAPTER TWO
The Physics of Swimming
T to blow your mind!
HIS CHAPTER IS GOING
That’s a bold statement! Please allow me to explain why I’m so confident
that what I’m about to share with you will have a massive impact on your
ability to swim more efficiently. I’m going to share exactly how you swim
faster. No tricks, gimmicks, or games.
Everything I will share is relatively simple to grasp, backed by science,
and can be applied to literally every level of swimmer! Is this too good to be
true? Is this Insanity?
"Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting
different results" - Albert Einstein
So, it’s technically not insanity, but it would be considered insanity to
continue doing the same thing you’re currently doing and expect different
results! The remarkable thing is that this methodology is not that
complicated.
If we break it down, there are only two ways to actually swim faster:
1. Decrease drag.
2. Increase propulsion.
That’s it! It’s as simple as that. There’s no other way to swim faster.
Okay, so that’s it?? I don’t need to finish the book?!
No. It’s simple, but it’s not THAT simple! In this chapter, I’ll get into the

--- Page 27 Text ---
science behind how the human body actually moves through the water. We’ll
talk about fluid dynamics at a super high level and why it matters. Finally,
I’ll share HOW you actually swim faster using the swimming equation.
The Laws of Physics
Physics dominates the world around us! We usually don’t go about our
day thinking how gravity, momentum, and acceleration impact our lives. On
the flip side, we intuitively ignore some of life’s most fascinating
phenomena. For example, the Earth is rotating 460 meters per second,
roughly 1,000 miles per hour. If that’s the case, then why aren’t we flying off
the face of the planet?
Consider this, air has a density of about 1.2 grams/liter, and water has a
density of about 1kg /liter. Air is therefore about 830 times less dense than
water. When we swim, it doesn’t actually feel 830 times more difficult than
walking….well, sometimes it does :)
Swimmers that have a deep understanding of swimming science will be
able to master their efficiency and hone their craft. Understanding the science
of swimming will help you be more efficient and learn how to better use your
time and energy in the water.
How To Float
Science can explain just about every aspect of swimming. Why do some
swimmers float and others sink like a rock?
Swimming relies on the nearly-neutral buoyancy of the human body. On
average, the body has a relative density of 0.98 compared to water, which
causes the average person to feel weightless in the water.
When you’re in the water, you float because the water pressure pushes
upward and balances your weight. We all have different buoyancies that are
determined by our body composition based on how fat and muscle is
distributed across our body.
In order to float in water, a person must be less dense than the water.
Everyone can float! Some swimmers have a much more difficult time
mastering this skill than others due to differences in body composition, but I
can assure you that everyone can float!
It doesn’t matter how “strong” you are or how “lean” your frame is, you
can do it! Recall back to finding your zen; that’s why this is really important.

--- Page 28 Text ---
You must first be calm, relaxed, and willing to “let go” in the water. If
you tense up, it simply will not work, and you’ll sing like a rock. If you’re a
more advanced swimmer, floating efficiency is still crucial because it allows
you to tap into your fine motor skills that allow you to swim with less effort
and gracefully float above the water as you swim!
Drag
As I mentioned at the start of the chapter, there are only two fundamental
ways to swim faster: by decreasing drag or increasing propulsion. Let’s first
discuss decreasing drag because this will allow you to improve the most in
the shortest amount of time.
At some point in our lives, we’ve stuck our hand out the window of a
moving car and noticed the changes in air resistance based on how our hand
was positioned. If we keep our hand parallel to the ground, we’ll feel less
wind resistance than if we hold it perpendicular with our fingertips pointing
to the sky.
This same concept applies in the water as well. In fluid dynamics, drag
(sometimes called resistance) is the force acting opposite to the relative
motion of the object (our body) with respect to a surrounding fluid (water).
Without getting too much into the weeds (or bubbles), just know that the
movement of the water around your body while you’re swimming is referred
to as "flow”.
There are four elements that interrupt this flow and cause frontal drag:
your body position, surface area, swim gear, and speed. The faster you swim,
the stronger the frontal drag becomes. This makes swimming with proper
technique even more crucial the faster you swim.
How To Decrease Drag
The most dramatic way you can decrease drag is by improving your body
position. This simply means the way your body floats (or sinks) in the water.
A good body position allows you to swim “high” in the water with minimal
points of resistance along your body-line.
Imagine for a second that your body is a Hydroplane! This nimble
watercraft is able to plane over the water at over 300 kilometers per hour.
Now imagine that same motorboat pulling an anchor 5 meters below the
surface of the water.

--- Page 29 Text ---
Surely the drag of the anchor in addition to the lower overall position of
the watercraft would make the hydroplane move at a fraction of the speed.
Our bodies function the same way in the water. In this analogy, your legs are
the anchor, and your body position is the hull of the hydroplane.
The single biggest component of drag on the human body after our head
and chest is our legs. Similar to a hydroplane dragging the anchor, our legs
can cause our entire body to sink in the water. If an elite swimmer raises his
or her hip position in the water by just one centimeter, that could be the
difference between making an Olympic team and breaking a world record.
For a beginner swimmer, in just one 30 minute session, you might be able
to raise your hip position by half a meter and swim 5 seconds faster per 25
meters. Over one kilometer, that’s nearly four minutes faster.
This type of almost-immediate reduction in time is absolutely incredible.
You will not find any other tool, swimsuit, or strategy that can make you
improve more quickly than raising your body position in the water.
So how do you go about improving your body position? The answer is as
simple as the question: Just look at the bottom of the pool when you swim.
Is it really that easy? Yes, it is! Your head position leads your overall
body posture in the water. If you look up, your hips will sink like a rock. If
you look down at the bottom and maintain a neutral head position, your body
will float behind your head.
This is no different than having a good standing posture. Try this fun
exercise. Close this book and place it on top of your head. Keep your eyes
level and look at something directly in front of you. Once you’ve found your
balance, picture yourself laying on your stomach with the same posture. This
is the proper body position in swimming.
It’s the fundamental position that all competitive stroke technique is
based off of. This is because, when you’re in the proper streamline body
position, your body has the least amount of drag on it. Your body occupies
the least surface area and displaces the least amount of water.
Think about this fundamental body position for every stroke you swim
and every time you push off the wall. Many swimmers prematurely lift the
head up to breath or simply look for the wall.
I promise you, the wall is not moving, just keep your eyes down on the
bottom. Most pools have a black line on the bottom in designated lap lanes.
It’s there for your benefit to swim in a straight line without having to worry
about where you’re going.

--- Page 30 Text ---
Most pools also have a T on the bottom near the wall on each side of the
pool to signify when the black line is ending and the wall is nearing. It’s
important to familiarize yourself with every pool you swim and use these
features to your advantage. If you’re swimming in open water, this is even
easier. Just look down, you probably won't be able to see the bottom anyway.
We’ve discussed how to decrease drag so that you can reduce resistance
in the water. This foundation in physics and a proper understanding of body
positioning will serve as the basis for all future stroke discussion in this book
and online material.
Increasing Propulsion
When I imagine the word propulsion, I think of a rocket-ship taking off!
A typical rocket produces more than a million pounds of thrust that allows it
to carry more than 6,000 pounds at speeds topping 22,000 miles per hour!
So how do we swim like a rocket-ship without burning tons of rocket
fuel?
Luckily for us, our bodies are much more efficient than rockets because
we can “re-launch” every time we push off the wall. Additionally, we can
actually increase our propulsion without changing our physical shape or
strength in the water.
Propulsion is improved first and foremost by working on stroke
mechanics and then becoming efficient in applying that technique in the
water. The combined effects of body balance, streamlining, and good stroke
mechanics are what yield faster swimming.
Early Vertical Forearm (EVF)
I want you to think of your hand as a giant paddle in the water! If you
want to pull more water, you need a bigger paddle, right?
Well, sort of, not really! You see, even though you can’t make your hand
bigger, you can actually increase the surface area of your “paddle” by
improving your technique and timing of the pull.
This sounds crazy right? It’s a concept called EVF.
EVF is short for “Early Vertical Forearm.” It’s one of the most commonly
referenced concepts in the technical swimming and coaching world, yet most
swimmers are unsure what it is and how to use it to swim faster.
The idea is you use your entire arm to pull water rather than just your

--- Page 31 Text ---
hand. Let’s break this down!
By focusing on pulling water with your forearm, you can increase the
surface area of your “paddle” and therefore swim faster.
The goal is to position your forearm as close to vertical as possible in the
catch phase of the stroke to grab the most water as early as possible. Rather
than pulling straight down, it’s important to initiate the catch with the
fingertips.
By doing this, you will increase the surface area of your pull. Your
forearm/arm has much more surface area than just your hand. We’ll discuss
how this applies to each stroke in future chapters.
I P D
NCREASING ROPULSION RILL
A great drill to develop this skill in all four strokes is called “fist drill.”
This is where you ball up your hand into a fist, and swim in 25m or 50m
increments focusing on initiating an early vertical forearm. After a few
hundred meters swimming like this, when you open your hands and swim
“normally,” your hands will feel HUGE!
You’ll feel as though the surface area of your hands just increased by 10-
20%. It feels incredible, and this drill can be applied to all the competitive
strokes.
Open Finger Swimming
Is it better to keep your hands cupped and fingers together when you
swim or to let your fingers spread apart?
Let’s try an experiment together. Take one of your hands and press all
your fingers together as tight as you can. After you’ve made a watertight seal
between your fingers, press your hand on the table in front of you. Press
down into the table with your palm and fingertips and feel how much control
and power you have.
Now, lift your hand off the table and open your fingers as wide as they go
like you’re a server in a restaurant carrying a massive tray of food. Now
repeat the process of pressing down on the table and feel how much power
you have. Press your hand into the table and feel the level of control and
balance you have from your thumb all the way to your pinkie finger.
When it comes to swimming, this experiment can be applied in the water
as well. Believe it or not, you actually pull more water with your fingers

--- Page 32 Text ---
slightly separated. Now I’m not saying you should swim with your fingers
spread apart, like Spiderman crawling up a wall.
In fact, that would be much slower than swimming with your hands
squeezed together. The perfect spread between fingers varies from person to
person, but as a general guide, your fingertips should be 5-10mm apart.
So, why is it faster to swim with your fingers slightly apart?
It comes down to physics! As your hand moves through the water, the
layer of water around your hands and between your fingers moves as well.
This “sticky” layer of water surrounding your fingers increases the surface
area of your hand. The force of the water will slightly flatten the skin on the
fingers, creating a webbed effect, similar to a duck or a frog.
Numerous studies have proven this to be true. A 2012 study published in
the Journal of Theoretical Biology found that a hand with fingers spread
slightly exerts a 5-10% greater force than a hand with fingers held tightly
together. This study also found that when compared to fingers spread wide, a
slight spread between fingers produced a 5-10% greater force!
In fact, researchers at the American Physical Society Division of Fluid
Dynamics concluded that a finger spread of just 10°s (5-10mm) could boost a
swimmer’s speed by 2.5% compared to swimming with fingers held together.
For example, if you swim a 25-second 50-meter freestyle, you could drop
a full ½ second by implementing this finger spread technique. That’s insane!
The Swimming Equation
Swimming can be a really technical sport, but it doesn’t have to be that
difficult. If you can break it down into its fundamental components, you can
gain a new appreciation for the sport and swim faster and smarter than ever
before.
If you want to get technical, I present to you the “swimming equation”
ST = (UT + TT) + (CC*SR)
This equation is designed to help demonstrate how manipulating certain
attributes of the stroke impacts your overall swimming time. Like all
equations, it’s made up of different variables. In later chapters, we’ll dive into
how you can actually manipulate these variables to swim faster.

--- Page 33 Text ---
ST = (UT + TT) + (CC*SR)
ST = (UT + TT) + (CC*SR)
ST = Swimming Time
UT = Underwater Time
TT = Turn Time
CC = Cycle Count
SR = Stroke Rate
The swimming equation represents two components: underwater time and
overwater time. Underwater time is made up of the time spent underwater
plus the time you spend turning at the wall. The overwater time is a function
of Cycle Count multiplied by Stroke Rate. The units for Stroke Rate is in
seconds/stroke.
So, how do you swim faster?
1. Decrease Cycle Count. In other words, take fewer strokes and
maximize distance per stroke. The key is maintain stroke rate while
doing this.
2. Increase Stroke Rate. This means to swim at a faster tempo. Again,
you must maintain distance per stroke.
3. Do Both: Decrease Cycle Count and increase Stroke Rate.
In order of difficulty, decreasing Cycle Count is by far the easiest and will
deliver the highest return on time invested in the water. By focusing on
improving your efficiency, you’re decreasing resistance in the water and
therefore maximizing distance per stroke. It’s much harder to increase tempo
while maintaining Cycle Count because this requires increasing propulsion.
Increasing propulsion is much harder as it will only come through seasonal
training.
To apply this to training, focus on maximizing distance per stroke. The
easiest component to improve is distance per stroke. I advise working on
tempo separate from distance per stroke.
This gives you a chance to focus on one particular component of the

--- Page 34 Text ---
swimming equation without compromise to the other parts. Focus on
maintaining tempo while increasing distance per stroke. Finally, do sets that
focus in SWOLF!
SWOLF
SWOLF is basically a measure of how efficiently you are in your
swimming. SWOLF in swimming's equivalent of Par (score). It’s calculated
by taking the number of strokes you take in one length of swimming added to
your time (in seconds) over that distance. This score is then normalized to a
25m pool distance.
Similar to Golf, you should focus on reducing your total score. A really
simple example is swimming 25m in 25 seconds while 20 arm strokes. Your
SWOLF is 45! Remember, similar to Golf, your goal is to decrease this
number so that you can become as efficient as possible.
If you can swim the same 25m distance in 23 seconds while maintaining
20 arm strokes, your SWOLF score just dropped to 43! It’s really important
to only benchmark your SWOLF score against yourself. Focus on improving
this over a period of time, and you’ll be well on your way!
Swimming can be complicated, but it doesn’t have to be! If you break it
up into these fundamental components and focus on the only two elements
that make you swim faster— decreasing drag and increasing propulsion—it
will be much simpler to not only understand how to improve, but it will also
be more fun as well. You’ll find ways to improve your swimming that you
never thought were possible!

--- Page 35 Text ---
CHAPTER THREE
How to Write a Swim Workout
M in the pool and swim back and forth with no plan.
ANY SWIMMERS JUMP
Maybe the goal is to swim continuously for 30 minutes, hit 10 laps, or swim
1,000 meters. Whatever your approach is, there’s no wrong way to go about
it, and if your plan works for you, that’s awesome!
If you’re looking to take your swimming to the next level, then adding a
bit of structure will help you improve your swimming like never before!
Someone who used to swim continuously and then switches to following
structured workouts in a plan will see an almost immediate improvement in
technique, speed, and confidence in the water.
I’ve seen this scenario play time and time again to countless members of
the MySwimPro global community. Not everyone can afford a personal
coach to provide specific workouts designed to meet certain goals and time
demands. This is why I created MySwimPro, a personal coach in your
pocket, and it’s why I wrote this book!
What is your swimming goal?
Understanding how a workout is structured will allow you to maximize
your time in the water. Before you write any swim workout for yourself or
follow a plan, the first step is figuring out the goal you’re trying to achieve!
Are you trying to lose weight? Improve endurance? Enhance speed?
Refine technique?
If you’re like many swimmers, you might have some or all of those goals
listed above. More advanced swimmers can focus on specific skills like
breath control, flip turns, pace, or underwater dolphin kick.
Having a clear idea of your goal before getting started will not only give
you more focus when you swim but will pave the way for a better guided

--- Page 36 Text ---
workout experience.
Once you know the goal of the workout, you next determine the optimal
outcome of the training session or plan. In other words, what measurable
output are you trying to achieve by the end of the workout or plan?
Maybe you want to achieve a certain time in a race. Perhaps you’re
looking to swim a specific distance confidently without stopping. Whatever
the outcome of your goal is, write it down! We’ll come back to the concept of
SMART goal setting at the end of the book!
Workout Structure
There are five main parts to a swim workout. Not all of them need to be
used in every workout. Typically a swim workout will have a “Warmup,”
“Main Set,” and “Cool Down.” Sometimes there’s an additional grouping
before or after the “Main Set” called a “Pre Set” or “Post Set.”
Warm Up: 10-20% of the workout. Activate your body and prepare
your muscles for the main set. Gradually build up your heart rate.
Main Set: 60-80% of the workout. This is the main focus of your
workout.
Cool Down: 10-20% of the workout. Lower your heart rate and
flush out lactic acid from your muscles.
Understanding the structure of the workout will allow you to have the
most efficient and powerful workouts. To start, let’s look at a set. An
individual set is a specific way that you’ll do a certain number of repetitions,
over a certain distance, with a certain stroke type in a specified amount of
rest.
Interval Training
Interval training is a really important concept to understand because it
will allow you to get the most efficient aerobic training. The total interval is a
factor of your total swim time plus total rest time. You can have an interval
based on the number of breaths taken or simply rest time.
The most standard form of interval training in competitive swimming is
swim time + rest time.
Example Set: 4 x 100s Freestyle @ 2:00

--- Page 37 Text ---
Repetitions: 4
Distance: 100 meters
Stroke Type: Freestyle
Interval: 2:00 (including both swim time and rest time)
What this means is, if you can swim a 100 freestyle in 90 seconds, you’ll
have 30 seconds rest before leaving for the next repetition. 4 x 100s Freestyle
@ 2:00 will take 8:00. If it takes you 90 seconds to swim each 100, then your
total set time will be 8:00, even though you only swam for 6:00.
Benefits of Interval Training
Whether you’re a novice exerciser or you’ve been working out for years,
interval training can help you jazz up your workout routine. Before going
deeper into workout structure, I want to reflect on some of the massive
benefits of interval training:
1. You’ll Improve Technique: By taking repetitive but short breaks,
you will train your body to only swim at a higher body position and
at greater speed.
2. You’ll Burn More Calories: Taking short breaks in the workout
allows you to train at a higher intensity and thus elevate your heart
rate (which helps you get the health benefits of a cardio routine,
including weight loss, if that’s your goal).
3. Improved Aerobic Capacity: As your cardiovascular fitness
improves, you’ll be able to train longer, faster, and more efficiently.
4. Added Variety: Swimming the same routine over and over can get
monotonous. When you do interval training, there is no limit to
what you can accomplish.
5. No Equipment Needed: All you need is a pace clock at the pool or
on your wrist. Even if you don’t have a clock, you can do interval
training by breath count between repetitions. An easy way to do this
is to count how many breaths you take one you touch the wall, and
then push off for the next length after taking a predetermined
number of breaths.
After factoring in all these benefits, I hope you’ve at least considered

--- Page 38 Text ---
giving interval training a go at your next workout. Your future self will thank
you!
Complex Set Structure
Sometimes there will be multiple sets together inside one part of the
workout. These sets that are grouped together are collectively called “Set-
Groups.” These groups of sets will sometimes have a bracket around them
instructing that each set-group be completed multiple times.
For example, instead of doing the main set once-through, you could do
the entire main set group for two, three, or four rounds. This is most common
for the Main Set group and sometimes for the set immediately before or after
the Main Set group. Here’s an example below:
Warmup
1 x 200 Freestyle @ 4:00
4 x 50 Kick @ 1:20
Drill Set
4 x 25 Drill @ :40
4 x 25 Drill @ :40
Main Set (2x)
4 x 100 Freestyle @ 2:00
4 x 75 Freestyle @ 1:30
4 x 50 Freestyle @ 1:00
4 x 25 Freestyle @ :30
Cool Down
4 x 50 Freestyle @ 1:00
In this workout example, doubling the Main Set would add another 1,000
meters to the workout. As you can see, there’s a lot of manipulation that can
be done to the actual workout structure that leaves the fundamental
components in place but can drastically change the overall impact of the

--- Page 39 Text ---
workout.
When you do a drill set before the main set, the goal is to apply whatever
skill you were working on in the drill set into the main set.
Workout Density
It’s also important to be mindful of workout density, or, the amount of
swimming you’re doing per unit of time. If you’re swimming a 1,000-meter
workout in 30 minutes, that is considered less “dense” than doing the same
1,000-meter workout in only 20 minutes.
Rest time plays a big role in workout density. If you don’t give yourself
enough rest during your warm up, you may not be able to perform well
during the main set, which should be the focus of your workout! I always
advise that you want to feel your best by the end of the workout.
You want to leave the pool feeling great so the next time you swim, you
can pick up where you left off! Oftentimes, swimmers get this backwards.
Countless times at the pool, I have seen swimmers spin their wheels in the
first 2-3 minutes and become burned out after just 10 minutes. Save some gas
in the tank to finish strong. You’ll get more out of the workout and leave the
pool feeling more satisfied.
Training Zones
Training zones help organize a swim workout into different intensities by
assigning a specific “zone” to each set. Although this is a more advanced
attribute to workouts, there is a big benefit to understanding it!
A foundation in training zones will help maximize your understanding of
structured workouts in the MySwimPro app or any other swim workout you
might see online or on a whiteboard at the pool.
To keep things simple, we’ll overview the seven training zones:
Recovery (Rec)
Endurance 1 (EN1)
Endurance 2 (EN2)
Endurance 3 (EN3)
Sprint 1 (SP1)
Sprint 2 (SP2)
Sprint 3 (SP3)

--- Page 40 Text ---
The first four zones represent “endurance” zones, and the last three zones
represent “anaerobic” zones. Coach Jon Urbanchek of the University of
Michigan suggested color-coding each energy category for ease of
understanding.
These zones are color coded and explained in detail in the MySwimPro
app. There’s no one-size fits all approach for color coding, so it’s common to
see workouts on whiteboards on pool decks with what seem to be bizarre
colors labeled next to sets.
In the MySwimPro app, we further simplified the zones by labeling them
with a more friendly title that describes the intensity. Here they are below:
The importance of training zones in swimming is based on the existence
of several different pathways to recycle energy in the muscle cells during
exercise. The main pathways of energy recycling are non-aerobic metabolism
(creatine phosphate), anaerobic metabolism (anaerobic glycolysis), and
aerobic metabolism.
Metabolism is the process of storing and releasing the energy. Energy for
the body is stored in different forms, and pathways are used to convert these
forms into accessible energy that an athlete can use to perform work. There
are no “borders” to energy pathways in a body.
At any given time, several pathways, not just one, may be engaged in
energy production, but dominance of an energy source depends on the
duration and intensity of the exercise. Usually workload is broken into
several energy “zones” based on the duration and intensity of the training.

--- OCR from Page 40 Image 1 ---
DESCRIPTION

Cool down & recavery sets. Typically done after race pace and sprint sets.

Warm up & drill sets. Pace that could be swum far lang durations where
maintaing stroke technique requires concentration.

ENDURANCE

Cruise pace; can be held for extended periods of time. Breathing and stroke are
thythmic and become strained after ~ 10 minutes.

SP2

‘Short rest: edge of aerobic threshold. Pace that is primarily taxing your VO2Z Max
system. Can be maintained for only §-10 minutes

Extremely hard efforts that can be maintained for the duration of the total set's
distance.

‘The maximum pace that can be held for a single repitition of a set: lactate.

Focus on speed, power, and tempo; taxes the neuromuscular system. Cannot be
maintained for more than 60 seconds.

--- OCR from Page 40 Image 2 ---
Sot Distance (m) |Set Duration (min) HR (%of max) | Work : Rest Sample Sat (Advanced Swimmer}
‘Variatie arable <0 WA 200 Easy Free

1000-4000 rie ro-a | 20-30Seconcs Rest [64000 Free 10 Seconds Rest

‘600 - 2.000 10-40 30-90. 15-30 Seconds Rest | x 300s Free & 15 Seconds Rest

Na L 200 - 1.000 6-00 0-100 10 20 Seconds Rest [4 x 180s Free @ 20 Seconds Rest
200 #00 218 36-100 tet 6.5208 Free Race Tempo i 48 Seconds Reset
$P2 «RACE PACE 200-600 +2 109 1214 45 808 Free Race Pac @ 90 Seconds Ret
25-100 1-2 108 13-14 41 25a Foe Max Spec 60 Secende Rist

--- Page 41 Text ---
Energy “zones” allow you to develop a specific pathway of energy
recycling and to quantify, track, and plan the physiological adaptations
desired for the specific set.
Different swimming events require the training of different energy
pathways. The same swimming set can be swum in different energy zones.
For example, you can swim sets with higher or lower intensities. This will
recruit different pathways of energy recycling.
The same swimming intensity, or even heart rate, affects the energy
recycling pathways differently when you’re at different stages of the season
(i.e., in the beginning of the season, after a sickness, or at peak
performances).
Luckily, with the MySwimPro app, you don’t have to worry about writing
workouts, designing set structure, choosing intervals, or planning out zones.
We take care of all that for you.
Hurray for software!
Seasonal Planning
The success of a season starts with planning! Whether you’re a coach or
athlete, it’s important to plan the season with the desired end results in mind.
It can be difficult to think long-term, but as the quote goes:
If you fail to plan, you are planning to fail - Benjamin Franklin
Building a successful yearly training plan starts with periodizing training
around major competitions or specific goals. Once you’ve mastered this
process, you’ll be that much closer to achieving your goals!
This final section of the chapter will be most relevant to swim coaches
and swimmers designing highly specific and personalized plans for
themselves. If you prefer to follow a structured plan in the MySwimPro App,
jump to the next chapter. If you’re a swimmer and want to nerd out about
seasonal periodization, let’s dive in!
What is Periodization?
Periodizing an exercise program aims to optimize training during short
(weeks, or months) as well as long periods of time (years, or an athletic
career) to produce maximum gains in physical performance. The goal of

--- Page 42 Text ---
periodization is to be able to achieve peak performance at a particular time,
such as at a major competition at the end of the season.
Structuring the Season
Macrocycles are seasonal or year-long plans. First, determine the date of
the key competition where a peak performance is desired. The season could
be a year in length, six months in length, or, as with some high school
seasons, only 10 weeks in length.
Mesocycles are training periods of approximately six to eight weeks. An
effective training period allows a swimmer to benefit from adaptations of the
body that are a result of training. As a general rule of thumb, the body will
need roughly six weeks to make significant physical and chemical changes in
its ability to provide energy to the muscles.
Microcycles are generally weeklong training periods, but they can range
from 4-10 days in length. Determine what the training emphasis will be in
each training block. This does not mean that ONLY one specific type of work
will be done; however, this will be the training emphasis during that training
block. Plan each week’s emphasis, then plan what will be emphasized each
day, each practice. Don’t forget to plan rest and recovery into the schedule.
Keep in mind that there are no real boundaries or borders between blocks
or cycles. All changes of training emphasis should be gradual.

--- OCR from Page 42 Image 1 ---
We = ae ne
MICROCYCLES
INDIVIDUAL SESSIONS

--- OCR from Page 42 Image 2 ---
man |
URE UL i
i
att
eylo | lo \g2
HELA:
eee} o |" las
NOLLYZIOO RS

--- Page 43 Text ---
The four Meso Cycles below are typical of one Macro Cycle!
1. General Preparation
2. Specific Preparation
3. Competition Phase
4. Transition Phase
The Science Behind Periodization
The goal is to create chemical changes at the cellular level and foster
physiological adaptation. This takes weeks (often months). John Leonard of
the American Swim Coaches Association stresses three key variables when it
comes to building workouts that include varying...
Intensity – how much effort is being applied in sets (energy zones)
Load Density – how much swimming is done in a period of time
(EX: 1,000meters/15minutes of training)
Load Volume – total amount of work done in a measured time
frame (total distance)
Execute and Evaluate
After each season, it’s important to evaluate! What were your goals? Did
you meet them? How did technique, training, and performance evolve over
each of the cycles and across the entire season?
This is your chance to analyze what happened and where improvements
could be made so your time is spent most efficiently achieving your goals!
Remember, the definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and
over again, but expecting different results. Learn from what worked, adapt,
and keep it moving!

--- Page 44 Text ---
MAIN SET
Swimming Technique

--- Page 45 Text ---
CHAPTER FOUR
Technique 101
I that everyone is just one day away from achieving their
TRULY BELIEVE
Gold Medal Moment.
You don’t have to win gold to achieve something great! I know that with
the right guidance, structure, and support, you can make your goals a reality.
One of the first steps in that swimming journey is refining your stroke
technique. We all approach swimming with different skills, flexibility, and
strengths. Despite the diversity of our background, there are core underlying
principles for each of the competitive strokes.
In this section of the book, I encourage you to reference the
complementary video library available in the online course to see the
swimming technique and drills mentioned. Adding a visual element helps
illustrate these foundational principles in each stroke.
Additionally, I strongly encourage you to learn about all of the strokes
covered in this section. I often get asked the question, “why should I swim
anything other than freestyle?!” I think I could write an entire book on that
topic alone! I’ll spare you the details and share the TL;DR version:
swimming every stroke improves your feel of the water, engages more
muscles (and thus, burns more calories), and adds variety to the workout for
mental stimulation.
What is Perfect Technique?
A couple of years after launching MySwimPro, I created a video titled,
“How To Swim Freestyle With Perfect Technique.” In this video I stood in
front of a whiteboard and shared six foundational principles of the freestyle

--- Page 46 Text ---
stroke. What seemed like a basic video at the time has now been viewed
millions of times.
The response to that video has been incredible, and I’m thrilled to include
it along with many more in the online course content. The comments viewers
left in the comment section of this video are incredible and one of the reasons
I created more content like that and even wrote this book.
The idea of “perfect technique” is something worth discussing before
diving into each stroke individually. “Perfection” is a goal that will forever
remain impossible for any human being to achieve. By definition, perfection
is the action or process of improving something until it is faultless.
In swimming (and in life) there is no such thing as “perfection”.
Understanding this, the only achievable goal is to strive to become the best
that you can possibly be. No swimmer has “perfect technique”. We are
always pushing ourselves to be better, and that is what I encourage you to do
when you think about applying these techniques to your own swimming and
in life!
Swimming History
Freestyle is the fastest and most efficient stroke in the water. But before
we dive into the mechanics, I’d like to take a step back and share a little bit of
swimming history with you!
The "front crawl" style of swimming has been in use since ancient times.
Archeologists have discovered bas relief sculptures in Egypt that illustrate
swimming dating back to 2000 BCE. It wasn’t until 1896 that swimming
made its first appearance in the modern Olympics in Athens, Greece.
The men's 100 meter freestyle was one of the four swimming events that
took place in Athens. There were just 13 total participants and no Olympic
50-meter pool. Instead, all swimming events were held off of the Piraeus
coast at the Bay of Zea where the water temperature ranged from 11-13°s
Celsius (53-57°s Fahrenheit).
Can you imagine what that must have been like??
“Freestyle” is not actually a stroke but a category in swimming
competition. The most common and popular stroke in freestyle races is the
front crawl because this type of swimming is the fastest. For example in a 50
meter freestyle race, swimmers can theoretically swim butterfly, backstroke,
breaststroke, or front crawl during the race.
I’ve actually done this several times myself. The look on the timer’s face

--- Page 47 Text ---
behind my lane after the race was precious. As fun as this sounds, I do not
advise swimming anything other than front crawl in a freestyle race unless
you have a very specific reason for doing so, such as recording an official
qualifying time for a future competition.
I know this sounds like a lot of semantics, but to keep things simple, the
term “freestyle” will be used as a synonym for “front crawl,” and in this book
and in most swimming contexts, when referring to “freestyle” it will most
likely mean “front crawl”.
Short Axis vs. Long Axis
There are a few reasons why Freestyle is the most efficient way to move
through the water and also the fastest style of swimming. One of those
reasons has to do with how your body is positioned in the water during all
phases of the stroke.
If you recall, there are only two ways to swim faster: reduce drag or
increase propulsion. In Freestyle and Backstroke, your body is positioned flat
at the surface of the water and therefore displaces the least amount of water
and thus the least resistance.
To take this concept a step further, when you swim freestyle and
backstroke, your body rotates horizontally side to side along a center axis
point. This center axis stats in the middle of the top of your head and extends
down through your spine.
Both freestyle and backstroke are considered long-axis strokes for this
reason. This is a really important concept to understand because the way you
swim these two strokes and also train them is very different from butterfly
and breaststroke.
Butterfly and breaststroke are considered “short-axis” strokes. Rather
than rotation around a center axis that extends from the head through the
spine, in butterfly and backstroke, you pivot the upper part of your body
using your hips as a horizontal axis point.
This fundamental difference between short axis and long axis strokes
changes how you should train these strokes. For example, due to the increase
in resistance that both breaststroke and butterfly pose as short axis strokes,
you can’t endure as much distance without sacrificing quality stroke
technique.
From a competition perspective, both breaststroke and butterfly should be
primarily swum at race pace or close to race pace as often as possible. This

--- Page 48 Text ---
also means shorter repetition distances and also more rest. It is really difficult
swimming butterfly for an extended period of time. It’s also near impossible
to swim “slow butterfly” while maintaining good technique.
On the flip side, it’s relatively simple to swim freestyle at any number of
speeds (particularly slower) for extended durations without faltering the
stroke mechanics. Therefore, we often find ourselves swimming freestyle as
the primary stroke to increase aerobic capacity and also as a way to develop a
feel of the water for beginners.
Streamline
Streamline is the fundamental body position in swimming. All four
competitive strokes are built off of a streamline body line. If you recall back
to the discussion on physics, reducing drag is the most impactful way to
swim faster.
Streamline is used when you push off the wall or dive in the water. Your
goal is to make your body as narrow as possible displacing the least amount
of water. You want to imagine yourself as a torpedo pushing off the wall.
This means your body is in alignment from fingertips to toes and your overall
body position is parallel to the surface of the water and bottom of the pool.
This is a skill that everyone can improve in!
It doesn’t matter if you’re just getting started or an olympic swimmer.
EVERYONE can improve their streamline body position when they push off
the wall or dive in. The reason this is so important is not only because it sets
up your body posture for all of the strokes, but also because you will never
swim faster than when you push off the wall in streamline.
The better your streamline off the wall, the more speed you will carry into
your first few strokes. This bonus speed you get from pushing off the wall is
something that should be leveraged even if your primary goal is open water
swimming and triathlon. Despite not being able to push off the wall in the
open sea, by teaching your body how to swim “fast” in those first few strokes
sets up your speed for the rest of that length of the pool.
The biggest mistake swimmers make with their streamline is not having
their head in a neutral position. Basically looking forward at your hands when
you push off the wall. This is relatively easy to improve. Just look down at
the bottom of the pool and stretch your fingers forward as far as you can.
Let’s try a dryland drill together.

--- Page 49 Text ---
D D H P
RYLAND RILL FOR EAD OSITIONING
Put down this book. Stand up. With your feet pressed together, stand tall,
and lock your eyes on something immediately at your eye level. Next, place
one hand over the other lining up your fingers and use the thumb on the top
hand to wrap around and grab the hand underneath.
Now the second to last step is to raise your arms above your head keeping
your hands in the same position. If you’re flexible enough, straighten out
your arms so your elbows are locked out. Squeeze your arms together
focusing on getting your elbows closer to each other.
At this point, you feel pretty narrow and have mastered the streamline,
but there’s still one more step! Stand on your tippy toes and stretch your
fingers up so the top of your middle finger is now 10 centimeters higher than
when you started.
If you’re in a public place and people are looking at you, this is amazing!
You can relax now :)
This is a fantastic drill that you can do periodically through the day to
stretch your body, improve your flexibility and also increase circulation. This
principle of elongating your frame is nothing new. There’s a scientific reason
torpedoes are engineered to be long and narrow.
Your body is a torpedo ready to blast off. The more you focus on
applying this principle of elongating your body and holding your streamline
tight when you push off the wall, the more speed you’ll transfer into your
strokes on top of the water.
A great drill to amplify this concept in the water is simply pushing off the
wall as hard as you can in order to streamline and then floating until you stop.
Try this the next time you go to the pool. How far can you float just by
pushing off the wall in streamline. No kicking at all.
Did you go 5 meters? 10 meters? 15 meters?
The more times you practice this, the better you’ll get. It’s exciting to see
your progress after just a few attempts. This same drill can be done diving
into the water. The best swimmers in the world can float a full 25 meters off a
dive. As incredible as that sounds, these athletes didn’t start that way. It takes
a consistent focus over the course of years (sometimes decades) to improve
streamline to the point of achieving those results.

--- Page 50 Text ---
CHAPTER FIVE
Freestyle
F (or front crawl) is the most efficient and fastest style of
REESTYLE
swimming. In fact, it is the chosen stroke for all marathon swimmers because
of how far you can go without stopping. Here’s the proof:
The longest distance ever swum without flippers in the open sea is 225
kilometers (139.8 miles)! I know that sounds insane, doesn’t it? This swim in
Italy was across the Adriatic Sea from Grado to Riccione. It took Veljko
Rogošić of Croatia 50 hours and 10 minutes to complete! It was swum 100%
using the freestyle stroke!
Not only is freestyle a stroke you can swim continuously but also into
older age. When Veljko Rogošić swam the 225 kilometer trek across the
Adriatic Sea, he was 65 years young. So, not only is freestyle the most
efficient, but there is also hope for swimmers of any age!
Head Position
To start, we’re going to break down the mechanics of the freestyle stroke
into a few core elements! The first being the brains behind the operation—
our head!
If we make the analogy of our body relative to a torpedo, our head is the
tip of the rocket. Our head experiences the most resistance with the water and
slows us down the most when trying to make forward motion.
Not only does your head cause the most resistance, it also sets the
direction for the rest of your body to follow. If the positioning of your head
changes by just a few°s, your body position could sink up to half a meter
under the surface of the water.

--- Page 51 Text ---
Recall the chapter on physics where we discussed how air is about 830
times less dense than water. The resistance from your body is the single
biggest limiting factor in swimming faster. The primary way you improve
this is by adjusting your head’s position.
So what does the perfect head position look like?
As I explained with “perfect technique,” no swimmer has it. We are
always pushing ourselves to be better, and that is what I encourage you to do
when you think about applying these techniques to your swimming!
Although there may be no perfect technique, there are certainly guidelines to
follow.
The first is thinking about keeping your head in a neutral position. What
does that mean?
Take this book, or any hardcover textbook, and place it on your head.
Standing tall, your eyes should be looking straight in front of you. In this
neutral position, your head is in alignment with your spine; you’re standing
tall, and if you tilt your head to look at your toes or raise your head to look at
the ceiling, the book will fall down.
This is how you should think about your head position in the water when
you swim. It sounds simple because it really is that easy. When you’re on
your stomach swimming freestyle, just look down at the bottom of the pool.
You should see the black or blue line at the bottom. Use it as your guide to
swim in a straight line.
If you’re in open water, this can be even easier because either the water is
too murky to see anything, or you’ll be able to see schools of fish within
several meters reach. In both of these environments it’s critical to keep your
head neutral. This can not be stressed enough.
The water-line should be roughly in the middle of your scalp, meaning at
least half of your head is submerged under the surface of the water. I’d go as
far to say 70-80% of your head should be underwater and just the top part
(20-30%) of your swim cap should be visible.
So what happens if your head is not in this position? You swim more
slowly. There’s no other way to slice it. But why?
Body Position
Everyone’s body has a different equilibrium point of buoyancy when in
the water. Regardless of your buoyancy, one thing is certain, if any point of
your body (head, arms, legs) rises above the surface of the water, the opposite

--- Page 52 Text ---
end of your body will sink to balance and return to a new equilibrium
position.
Think of your body as a seesaw. If you raise your head, your legs will
sink. If you raise your legs (if you can), your head will submerge. Your body
is like a scale of checks and balances. The major difference between your
body and a seesaw is that your body is not equally distributed in buoyancy.
Your upper body is significantly more buoyant than your lower body and
as a result this seesaw analogy is amplified if you raise your head. It’s
relatively easy for your upper body to stay buoyant and float. Your legs on
the other hand depend on downward pressure from your head to keep your
body level. A great drill to focus on proper head position is swimming with a
paddle on your forehead.
Paddle Drill
Grab a flat hand paddle and remove the straps. Place it on your head just
as you placed the book on your head to find a neutral head position. As you
swim, the water pressure caused by the resistance of the paddle will keep the
paddle on pressed against your head. The faster you go, the easier this
becomes because there is more pressure being applied to keep the paddle on
your head.
If you move your head position even a little, the paddle will not stick.
This neutral head position with the paddle applies to when you breathe as
well. You should be able to rotate your head to the side while maintaining a
neutral head position and keep the paddle pressed against your head.
Remember, the goal of this drill is to keep your head in a neutral position so
that the rest of your body remains high in the water and therefore reduces
overall drag!
A more advanced drill to try is swimming with a cup on the top of your
head. This drill will challenge even the most advanced swimmers. Focus on
balancing a cup, ideally half full with water, on the top of the head and keep
your eyes on the bottom of the pool. Any lateral deviation or up and down
movement will cause the cup fall of your head.
The Pull Phase
Now that our head position is as prime and proper as it will ever be, let’s
focus on what you do with your arms! In this section, we’re discussing how

--- Page 53 Text ---
to increase propulsion (part two of how to swim more quickly).
As a baseline in freestyle, I want you to always keep your elbows above
your hands. Think of this as a rule. Certainly in life, there are those who
offend the law, but for the scope of this chapter, let’s abide by the rules and
follow this concept.
Keeping your elbows above your hands applies both above and below the
surface of the water. In freestyle, when your hands are above the surface of
the water, this is called the recovery phase of the stroke. When your hands
are underwater, this is the pull phase.
Your fingertips should enter the water middle finger first about half a
meter in front of your shoulders at about a 45° angle to the surface of the
water. You want to feel like you’re sliding your hands into the water. It
should be clean and with minimal splash. Any bubbles at this point in the
stroke will simply interrupt with what comes next, so it’s important to have a
“clean” hand entry into the water led by your middle finger first.
Once your fingertips slide into the water, it’s important to extend
horizontally just under the surface before anything else. Oftentimes,
swimmers will have their hand enter the water and initiate a pull
immediately. This is not as efficient as leveraging the forward momentum
your body already has and reaching your fingertips further just centimeters
below the surface.
Early Vertical Forearm
Once your fingertips have extended and your arm is fully submerged
below the surface, then you can start the pull phase. At this point, your body
position will have rotated slightly so you’re slightly towards your side. If
you’re flat, this means you have not fully stretched your fingers forward.
Next, you’ll initiate what’s called an EVF, short for Early Vertical Forearm.
If you recall from the prior physics chapter, this is to increase your
pulling surface area so that you can pull more water. Rather than just pulling
your arms straight down, focus on bending your elbow and positioning your
forearm to become vertical. This will increase the plane of pulling force by
extending your leverage your fingertips all the way to your elbow.
The first few hundred arm strokes you focus on this, it will feel weird.
After a few thousand strokes with intentional focus, this will start to feel
normal. Then, after a few million strokes, you’ll have developed a strong feel
of the water that leverages the illusive early vertical forearm.

--- Page 54 Text ---
If that sounds intimidating, it doesn’t have to be, and I’m going to share
with you a drill progression that can speed this process up 10x. That’s right,
if you follow the progression below, you’ll be able to pick this skill up in an
order of magnitude less time. Here’s how it works.
Drill Progression for EVF
You’ll start with fist drill. Ball up your hand in a tight fist and swim one
or two lengths of the pool focusing on catching the water with your forearm.
This is supposed to feel slow because the surface area of your hand has been
reduced significantly. After struggling to swim 50, 100, or 200 meters with
tight fists, next, open your pointer finger on both hands.
Swim another few lengths focusing on entering the water with your
pointer finger, and only your pointer finger. After a few lengths, add your
middle finger so now you’re swimming with your hand in a fist with your
pointer finger and middle finger sticking out. Be sure to follow the drill
progression in this order to avoid offending your fellow swimmers and
lifeguards at the pool :)
Next, add your thumb. Swim a few lengths.
Finally, open up your hands and swim “all natural” with the intense focus
on catching the water with an early vertical forearm. If you follow this
progression just a few times, you’ll feel a noticeable difference in how your
arms and entire body connect with the water.
Breathing
Many people can swim what seems to be flawless freestyle until they
need to take a breath. Unless you were born with gills, you’ll be tough out of
luck in the pool if you don’t know how to breathe easily when you swim.
Notice how I used the word “easily.” Breathing in all four competitive
strokes should feel easy, effortless, and repeatable. In order to do this, we
need to take a step back and talk about the basics of breathing and blowing
bubbles.
When we learned how to swim, the first skill that was taught was blowing
bubbles before submerging underwater. We learned a very simple concept.
Above the water, we breathe in, and below the water, we breathe out. More
specifically, above the water we breathe in through our mouths, and under the
water we breathe out through our nose in a controlled humming pattern.
While this sounds basic, it’s fundamental to sustained swimming, not just
freestyle, but any form of swimming. When we swim freestyle, we need to

--- Page 55 Text ---
focus on maintaining a controlled exhale through our nose when our face is
under the water. As we rotate to the side to breathe, there should be a mini
burst exhalation and just enough time to inhale enough air through our mouth
before returning to our neutral head position.
When you rotate to the side to breathe, try to keep one eye under the
surface of the water. Remember, about 70% of your head should be
submerged while maintaining your neutral head position. Because you’re
making forward progress, your head will create a natural air pocket when you
rotate to breathe. When your arm is fully extended, this is your opportunity to
breathe and inhale on your side opposite to the arm that’s extended.
Rotation
If you’re looking to take your freestyle to the next level, this next section
on how rotational momentum can make you swim faster might make all the
difference for you.
If you swim with your body flat, you will limit your stroke length by 15-
20%. In order to reach maximum distance per stroke every time your arm
extends forward, you’ll need to rotate your body. This movement depends on
using your entire body to drive the rotation. The core focal point of this
rotation is your hips.
Your hips drive the rotation and your arms simply follow the motion.
This seems somewhat counterintuitive to what actually happens, and that’s
okay. When you swim, it’s easier to think about extending your fingertips
forward and then rotating your hips. This works, but it’s not as impactful as
setting up the rotational drive with your core.
If you can drive rotational power from your diaphragm, you’ll create
rotational momentum that will then support an increase in your distance per
stroke. The° to which you rotate depends on a few different factors.
In general, the higher your stroke rate, the less you’ll rotate to your side
on each stroke. In a full effort sprint, you may only rotate 10-15°s to each
side. When you’re swimming more casually, rotation might increase to 30-
45°s per side. You do not want to fully rotate 90°s onto each side because the
increase in distance per stroke is negated by a loss of rotational momentum.
Rather than rotate fully to each side, focus on getting half way there with
your hips. This is just enough to reach full extension that will increase your
distance per stroke while maintaining forward rotational momentum.
Although I don’t advise full rotation while swimming regular freestyle, this is

--- Page 56 Text ---
a great drill to focus on developing balance in the water.
R D : 3 S + 12 K
OTATION RILL TROKES ICKS
A great drill I recommend for swimmers of all levels is called 3 strokes +
12 kicks. This drill can be done with fins for added support. You swim
freestyle taking three arm strokes, then on the third stroke rotate to full
extension and kick on your side for 12 kicks. After the 12 kicks, take three
additional strokes and then balance on your opposite side for another 12
kicks.
This drill focuses on balance and setting up rotational momentum from
your core. It’s important to remember that this full rotation is not how you
swim regular freestyle, it’s simply a drill that exaggerates the motion to focus
on a specific skill.
If you recall the swimming equation, your overwater time is a result of
cycle count multiplied by stroke rate. If you can focus on using rotational
momentum to increase your distance per stroke and therefore decrease your
cycle count, then you’ll swim faster if you’re able to maintain your stroke
rate.
Kick
Kicking in freestyle is the last technique element I overview, because it is
the least impactful to improvement. This is a bold statement! Especially when
you consider that our legs are the strongest parts of our body and when we
watch the pros swim on TV, it looks like they have a motorboat on their legs
propelling them forward.
This is not to say that kicking is not important, quite the opposite, it’s
extremely important, just not the first place we start when learning the basics.
A strong kick can easily make the difference between an Olympian and an
average swimmer. Regardless of how strong (or weak) you are at kicking,
you can always improve!
Freestyle and Backstroke use the flutter kick. This is where you point
your toes, keep your legs straight and move your legs opposite each other in
an up and down pattern. The fulcrum for this up and down movement comes
from your hips. A big mistake swimmers routinely make is bending knees in
the flutter kick. A little bit of knee bend is okay, but the legs should appear
almost straight through the entire up and down motion.

--- Page 57 Text ---
The second biggest mistake many swimmers make, and I myself am
guilty of this, is having too large of an amplitude (i.e., the total distance your
feet travel from the lowest point to the highest point in one kick cycle). This
amplitude distance should be less than half a meter. The reason for such a
small kick is that any additional propulsion of a bigger kick will be negated
by an increase in resistance.
Remember, it’s much easier to decrease drag than to increase propulsion,
and this concept is amplified through the kick. Think, short and fast. There’s
no other way to do it in freestyle and backstroke. A great analogy to focus on
this is “kicking in a bucket.” Imagine fitting both your legs inside a narrow
cylindrical tube or bucket.
You must keep your amplitude small enough so that your heels and toes
do not hit the bucket when you kick. Think about kicking as fast and short as
possible while maintaining thighs compact technique. This is easiest to
practice kicking in streamline on your back. Keep your toes pointed, and
knees under the surface of the water.
My final point on kicking technique is simply, don’t overthink it!
Oftentimes, swimmers, especially beginners, place too much focus on
kicking, and it actually takes away from the more important technique
elements like head position, the catch, and pull. If anything, I encourage all
beginner swimmers to de-emphasize the kick.
Because our legs are the strongest and most muscular parts of our body,
they also take up the most energy and blood flow. In a shorter distance sprint,
that’s not a problem—it should be all cylinders firing at once. Kick as much
as your body allows! If you’re swimming anything longer than a few
minutes, though, you’ll want to de-emphasize your legs. You’ll be able to
swim for a longer period of time, with a better body position and less effort.

--- Page 58 Text ---
CHAPTER SIX
Backstroke
S , backstroke is a long axis stroke. Your body rotates
IMILAR TO FREESTYLE
upon an axis that leads with your head and runs though your spine. There are
many similarities between freestyle and backstroke but also a few key
differences. In this chapter, we’ll go over all of these stroke specifics in great
detail with a holistic focus on technique.
Before we get into the stroke mechanics, it’s important to note that
backstroke is the best stroke to swim for recovery purposes. We’ll get into
the details in further chapters when we discuss injury prevention, but to offer
a bit of context, swimming backstroke is great for your shoulders. It’s not
only good for your shoulders because it offers a reverse rotation of freestyle,
but also because your body position is 180° opposite to when you swim
freestyle, breaststroke, or butterfly.
Not only will swimming backstroke help keep your shoulders healthy, it
will also improve your feel of the water. Swimming all the stroke variations
will do this, but backstroke specifically will develop your latissimus dorsi
strength and make it easier to improve your early vertical forearm catch in
freestyle! Now that I’ve convinced you to swim a little bit more backstroke in
every workout, let’s get into the stroke mechanics!
Head Position
When breaking down any of the competitive strokes, we’ll start with head
position. We know that in order to swim faster, we must reduce drag and
increase propulsion. In backstroke, the ideal head position is neutral and in-
line with our spine. You need to be comfortable floating on your back on the

--- Page 59 Text ---
surface of the water.
Your eyes should be looking straight up at the ceiling or sky, and your
belly button should be at the surface level of the water. The simple biggest
mistake swimmers make is tilting their head forward and looking down at
your feet. When you tilt or lift your head up, your hips sink immediately.
This shift in body position is even more dramatic than in freestyle.
The best backstrokers in the world can swim with a water bottle resting
flat on their forehead even during a race. If you haven’t tried this drill
already, I highly encourage it. The next time you’re at the pool, grab a water
bottle or cup and fill it half way full with water. Rest it on your forehead and
slowly start kicking. Once you have found balance while kicking on your
back, start taking arm strokes.
Does the cup fall off your head??
You don’t have to be a world-class swimmer to master this skill. In fact, I
think any swimmer can swim a full 25 meters of backstroke with a cup half
filled with water on their forehead. You’ll be able to master this after a few
attempts if you’re comfortable floating on your back first. I hope you can
master this skill, and if you’re not there yet, keep practicing.
The idea of swimming with a cup filled with water on your head is less
about theatrics and more about swimming with a level head position. Our
head position leads our body position, and we want to swim with as neutral of
a body line as possible in the water.
Some swimmers are able to balance the cup on their forehead and still
have poor head position. How is this possible? You can keep your forehead
level, but your overall head position is too high out of the water. You want
nearly your entire head submerged under the water.
70-80% of your head should be under the surface of the water. Your ears
should be underwater as well, and only your face should be dry. Just like
Freestyle, in backstroke you will be displacing the most water with your head
first, which is why it’s so important to keep it inline with your spine and the
rest of your body.
Body Position
If you think about the part of your body that displaces the most water, it’s
your torso. After your head breaks the surface of the water and creates the
most resistance, your shoulders, chest, and back follow.
Keeping with the theme of floating on top of the water and your head

--- Page 60 Text ---
being inline with your spine, your legs should do the same. Because your hips
and legs are narrower than your mid-section and torso, it’s important to
maintain a low profile in the water.
This means minimizing the size of your kick and as you rotate, which
we’ll discuss soon, you must stay inline with your spine. Similarly to
freestyle, the amplitude of your kick should be less than half a meter. The
total distance between your toes and heels should be within your body line.
When you swim backstroke, your legs should be almost straight, and your
toes should be pointed. The goal is generate some level of propulsion for the
stroke but only while keeping a profile small enough to not increase total
drag. In the last chapter on freestyle, I advised de-emphasizing the flutter
kick.
In backstroke, this still holds true but to a lesser°. In freestyle, you can
pull slightly more water per stroke and obtain an early vertical forearm with
more leverage sooner than in the backstroke pull. Therefore, in freestyle
you’re less dependent on the kick to generate rotational momentum. In
backstroke, because all these components are slightly less impactful, you do
need a strong kick to help drive propulsion.
In freestyle, you can swim pretty fast without kicking and just dragging
your legs. In backstroke, that’s not going to work as well, and you’ll suffer by
not having a consistent driver of rotational momentum that the kick provides
for. Just remember when you're kicking in backstroke, to keep it short, fast,
and within your body line to not increase overall body drag.
The Pull
While the biggest similarities in freestyle and backstroke are head and
body position, the largest difference between these long-axis strokes is how
your arms catch and pull water under the surface and also how you recover
your arms on top of the water.
When you start the catch phase of the stroke, your hand should enter the
water pinkie finger first. Your arm should be 100% straight. From your
shoulder to your middle finger should be as straight as a meter-stick. In
contrast with freestyle, you recover with a bent elbow.
Similarly to freestyle, you should aim to enter the water at about shoulder
width. Using the arms of the clock as a reference this would be 1 o’clock and
11 o’clock. Pro tip: you should actually feel like you’re entering the water
with your pinkie at 2 o’clock and 10 o’clock for a slightly wider hand entry.

--- Page 61 Text ---
The reason for this is that most swimmers have a hard time judging where
shoulder-width is and end up entering the water behind their head which is
far too narrow.
Once your pinkie finger enters the water, you begin to drive that pinkie
finger down towards the bottom of the pool, and after the entire hand is
submerged you begin to sweep your hand so that your palm faces your feet.
As you rotate your body and your hands get deeper, you should aim to have
your forearm straight from your middle finger all the way to your elbow. At
this point, your bent elbow should resemble the freestyle early vertical
forearm, only, you’ll be leaning towards your side, rather than on your
stomach.
Once the catch is initiated, you pull the water by pushing your hand
towards your hips with your palm and forearm leading the power. At this
point, your opposite arm should have already exited the water. As you exit
the water with your pulling hand, you should aim to finish the stroke with
your thumb facing up as it leaves the water.
With your thumb pointing up, your arms should be straight out of the
water and now, you’ll be in the recovery phase of the stroke. This motion is
symmetrical on both sides of your body. In other words, when your right arm
is under the water in the pull phase, your left arm is out of the water in the
recovery phase. It should almost feel like your arms are a windmill. There is
no pause at any point in the stroke.
A great drill to work on catching the water is swimming double arm
backstroke.
D - B D
OUBLE ARM ACKSTROKE RILL
To execute this drill, simply float on your back and take both arm strokes
at the same time. This drill is great for learning how to balance on your back
at all phases of the stroke as well as entering the water at 11 o’clock and 1
o’clock with your pinky first. The most impactful part of this drill is, once
your hands enter the water, being able to generate twice as much underwater
force by pulling your hands at the same time.
When you do this double arm backstroke drill, it’s critical that you do not
rest your arms at the finish of the pull. As soon as you’re done with the pull
phase of the stroke, you should focus on exiting the water with your thumbs
first as soon as possible to maintain forward momentum and stroke
continuity. Additionally, this drill completely disregards any rotation in favor

--- Page 62 Text ---
of focusing on swimming flat to focus on pulling with a shallow catch. We’ll
talk about rotation next!
Rotation
Just as in freestyle, when you swim backstroke you rotate side to side
with rotational momentum generated from your hips. You can swim
backstroke completely flat, but it will reduce the amount of water you can
pull and make you tired much more quickly. In order to rotate effectively,
you must start with a neutral body position and drive the rotation with your
lower body.
Your hips drive the rotation, and your upper body simply follows. You
should aim to rotate up to 45° to each side when swimming casual
backstroke. The more you increase tempo, the less you’ll be able to rotate.
The best swimmers are able to maintain an effective° of rotation while
increasing tempo for different distances and effort levels of backstroke.
A great drill to work on rotational momentum and also balance is 3
strokes + 12 kicks. This is the same drill that can be done for freestyle, but
when you swim backstroke, you are able to breath the entire time because
you’re on your back. After taking three strokes, pause rotation on your side
for 12 full kicks. This will teach you how to balance on your side. Then on
the final kick, initiate rotation with your hips to start the three arm strokes.
While you do this drill, focus on rotating during the three strokes between
the 12 kicks. When you pause for the kicks, remain on your side and keep
your eyes up maintaining a neutral head position. When you swim backstroke
normally, you will not pause all the way on your side, but the point of the
drill is to build comfort and exaggerate this motion.
The more you swim backstroke, the more natural this rotation will feel.
Eventually, you’ll be in a position where it will be difficult to swim
backstroke without rotating side to side just because your body will have
become accustomed to moving forward with the help of rotational
momentum.
Tempo
I could write an entire chapter just on tempo and how it applies to each of
the four competitive strokes and swimming in general. But to keep things
concise, I added tempo to this chapter, because swimming backstroke with a

--- Page 63 Text ---
slow tempo is the single biggest detterent of success. This is most true for
competitive swimmers looking to swim faster in backstroke and the
Individual Medley.
The challenge we all face when swimming backstroke is the concept of
being on our back and the opportunity to breathe whenever we choose. Now I
should clarify; when we swim backstroke, there is actually a breathing pattern
that follows your arm cadence. In other words, you take about one breath per
arm cycle naturally, so if you move your arms faster, then the time between
breaths becomes shorter. Keep in mind, moving your arms faster, also takes
more energy, so your breathing/stroke tempo balances out.
When we swim backstroke, we can get lazy. I’m very guilty of this.
When you train with a slower arm tempo, it’s very difficult to increase this
when it comes time to race. Increasing our backstroke tempo feels extremely
exhausting and unsustainable. This is why it’s so important to focus on your
tempo when swimming backstroke. Don’t let it get too slow. If it always feels
too easy, you’re probably not moving your arms fast enough. If you want to
race fast, you need to train fast! It’s that easy.
Let’s go!!!
A great technique to work on increasing tempo in backstroke is called a
“spin drill.” This is where you do short bursts of spinning your arms in the
backstroke motion as quickly as possible. In order to do this effectively,
you’ll need to break all conventional wisdom of body position we discussed
in this chapter and position your body at a 45-90° angle to the water. Your
head and shoulders should be completely out of the water and your legs
should be nearly a meter below the surface.
You have 10 seconds to spin your arms in this position as quickly as
possible. The goal is not to make forward progress by pulling as much water
as you can, rather increase your tempo to max speed. This is a high intensity
and effort drill, so give yourself some rest between reps. After a few of these
high effort bursts, you’ll notice how much easier it is to swim backstroke
with a higher tempo.
That’s the goal! Swim more quickly with less effort. If you can train your
body to swim backstroke with a higher average tempo while still maintaining
distance per stroke, you’ll be well on your way to swimming backstroke
faster and smarter than ever before!

--- Page 64 Text ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
Breaststroke
A , Breaststroke was the most common stroke used
T ONE POINT IN HISTORY
for fitness swimmers and in competition! Breaststroke was the fastest style of
swimming until the 20th century. To this day, you’ll see many swimmers use
this style as their primary stroke. This is mostly true in Asia and other parts
of the world.
This is no surprise, because Breaststroke can be the most enjoyable and
natural strokes to swim for some. For others, it’s quite the opposite and
breaststroke feels painfully slow. Advances in stroke technique over the last
200 years have allowed the other competitive strokes to zip by breaststroke in
speed and efficiency.
Today, breaststroke is by far the slowest of the four competitive
swimming strokes. While that might sound depressing, it shouldn’t be.
Breaststroke is an incredibly calming way to move through the water. In
open-water swimming, it can be used as a way to temporarily relax and spot
for direction. In an emergency, it’s the easiest stroke to swim while
continuously keeping your head out of the water to see what’s ahead.
Recall that breaststroke and butterfly are both short-axis strokes. Rather
than rotating around a center axis that extends from the head through the
spine, in butterfly and backstroke you pivot the upper part of your body using
your hips as a horizontal axis point.
Simply put, this upper body pivot in short-axis strokes and the fact that
your body position is lower in the water is why breaststroke is the slowest
stroke. This is no reason to be afraid of or avoid breaststroke. If anything, this
means there’s an even greater opportunity to advance your skills and swim
faster because there is so much opportunity for improvement.

--- Page 65 Text ---
Body Position
Since we know that when we swim breaststroke we’re lower in the water,
we must first address our body’s position. During the breath, your hips
naturally sink to the lowest position of the stroke causing a massive amount
of water resistance and therefore slowing you down.
The more effectively you can keep your hips high in the water, the less
you’ll slow down and the faster you’ll swim. Remember, streamline is the
fundamental body position in swimming. In breaststroke, every stroke starts
and ends in this position. We’ll discuss timing in the next section, but
remember that your goal in breaststroke is to keep your body position as high
as possible during all phases of the stroke.
When you watch someone swim breaststroke from the side of the pool,
it’s easy to see only their head come out of the water every time they take a
breath. Unlike the other competitive strokes, sometimes this is all you see. In
backstroke, butterfly, and freestyle, you will see the swimmers arms recover
over the surface of the water, and sometimes a large part of the torso comes
out of the water.
If only your head comes out of the water in breaststroke, that means your
head is no longer inline with your spine. When you swim breaststroke, you
want to imagine a laser from the center of the top of your head that runs
through your spine to your hips. You can’t bend lasers, so remember when
you lift your upper body to take a breath, this laser must remain in a straight
line.
This laser analogy ends at your hips. Your hips to your toes must remain
as close to the surface of the water as possible at all points of the stroke.
When you return to streamline after the breath, the laser will start at the top of
your head and extend all the way to your toes. This flat body position is the
fastest phase of the stroke and in the next section we’ll discuss how to get
there!
Timing
I’ll make this very simple. Every time that you swim breaststroke, say in
your head:
1. Pull
2. Kick

--- Page 66 Text ---
3. Glide
That’s the breaststroke timing. It’s that easy. You might ask yourself,
when do you breathe??
You breathe during the first phase of the stroke, the pull! As you start to
pull, you lift your head up to breath. By the time you’ve taken a breath and
your arms begin to recover back to streamline, you enter the second phase of
the stroke. The kick drives your body into streamline and the final phase of
the stroke.
The fastest part of breaststroke is the transition from the second phase to
the third phase. When you finish the kick and extend into streamline for the
glide, you carry the most speed. This is the fastest part of the stroke by far
and results in forward propulsion. No matter how strong your pull is, you will
not be able to master breaststroke without an effective kick and glide.
For myself and many others, the glide is the most enjoyable and
satisfying part of the stroke. It’s the fruits of labor from the first and second
phase. If you had a strong pull and kick, you’ll be able to have an amazing
glide. The length of the glide really depends on how long and fast you’re
swimming breaststroke.
For more casual swimming, the glide might be a full second in
streamline. In a short 25-meter maximum effort sprint, the glide phase may
only be a tenth of a second. The duration of the glide dictates the stroke
tempo. No the other way around. Swimmers often try to swim faster by
increasing stroke tempo and neglecting the glide phase. This is a mistake.
You can’t skip one part of the stroke.
If you watch the fastest swimmers in the world, the stroke mechanics are
virtually the same in the 50, 100, and 200 meter distances. The major
difference comes in how long the glide phase is maintained between strokes.
In a 50-meter sprint, this might be one or two tenths of a second. In the 100-
meter race, this might extend to three or four tenths of a second. In a 200-
meter race, elite swimmers can hold their streamlines for nearly a full second
before starting the next stroke.
When it comes to stroke timing, this is most important in breaststroke.
You simply can’t be “off”. It just doesn’t work. Pull, kick, glide. Repeat after
me: Pull, Kick, Glide. Good.
Every time you swim breaststroke, you need to say this in your head. A
great way to reinforce this concept of elongating the stroke is to simply count

--- Page 67 Text ---
how many strokes it takes you to swim across the pool.
Count how many strokes you take in a 25 or 50-meter pool. Then, try
again and take one less stroke. Then take off another stroke. For simplicity,
count every breath as a stroke. If you count 12 strokes for your 25-meter
breaststroke swim, then try again and take 11, then 10. At a certain point,
you’ll sacrifice speed and momentum for the sake of reducing total stroke
count.
There is a fine balance between maximizing distance per stroke and
speed. Recall the swimming equation for how these variables work with each
other. This balance in stroke length and efficiency will become easier to
manage as you practice counting strokes.
I personally count how many strokes I take every length I swim
breaststroke. I generally swim six strokes comfortably in a 25-meter pool. If I
want to stretch it out, I’ll take five strokes. If I’m increasing my tempo in
favor of speed, I’ll take seven. It’s not perfect, but it’s definitely routine, and
this allows me to practice patience and discipline to always maximize
distance per stroke. I encourage you to do the same in not only breaststroke
but all the other strokes as well!
Pull
Now that we understand when to perform the different parts of
breaststroke, we need to talk about how each phase works. The first part of
the stroke is our pull. It initiates from the streamline position. As you separate
your hands from streamline, you’ll sweep out slightly. Your hands should
sweep just past your shoulders and position your upper body to rise out of the
water for the breath.
At this point, you’ll pull your hands towards your chest pulling yourself
forward. In the middle of the pull phase, you should focus on initiating an
early vertical forearm with both arms simultaneously. Unlike the other
strokes, the duration of this EVF is short lived because you must bring your
hands together to return to streamline. Once the pulling motion is complete,
it’s imperative to return your hands to streamline as quickly as possible to
reduce the amount of drag you create.
During the recovery phase of the stroke, you’re actually pushing yourself
backwards. This is why it’s so important to do this swiftly, and I encourage
swimmers to keep the hands at the surface level of the water. Your thumbs
should skim over the surface and drive your hands forward as if you’re

--- Page 68 Text ---
handing someone a plate with both hands.
Unlike the other strokes, the pull in breaststroke has a legal restriction on
how it should be performed correctly. This sounds technical, but it really is
not. In breaststroke, when you pull underwater, your hands can not cross
below your belly button before recovering back to streamline.
This is a mistake beginner swimmers make often because of the feeling of
immediate speed and power when you pull both of your arms down at the
same time. The problem with this movement is not only that you will be
disqualified if done in a competition, but it’s actually slower than if you made
your pull smaller.
It sounds counterintuitive: pull less water and swim more quickly?
Yes! This is because the increase in propulsion to pull your arms down
further is negated by the greater resistance in recovering your hands back to
streamline. Therefore, the ideal distance to pull your hands down is to your
nose. If you’re pulling your hands past your nose, it’s too far.
Remember the timing: Pull, Kick Glide. Your goal should be to finish the
pull phase, kick your hands forward to streamline in as little time as possible.
This is the slowest phase of the stroke, so it’s important that it’s done swiftly
while maintaining an efficient stroke technique.
Kick
There are two kinds of people in the world. Those who have a natural
breaststroke kick, and those who do not. The “natural” breaststrokers are
comfortable flexing their feet, treading water with an egg beater or frog kick,
and often walk a little funny with their feet pointing out. If this sounds like
you, you have a leg up (pun intended) for swimming breaststroke. I myself
fall into this category as well.
It’s not all sunshine and roses for us “breaststrokers”! We often struggle
at pointing our toes for flutter and dolphin kicks and as a result are poor at
kicking in freestyle, backstroke, and butterfly. If you don’t feel comfortable
flexing your feet and have trouble with the frog kick, you’re like most
swimmers!
Regardless of which group you’re in, everyone can always improve their
breaststroke kick. Even if you’re a very beginner, by working on the right
elements of the kick and focusing on some key drills, you can improve your
efficiency and power in breaststroke. This second phase of the stroke is so
important it’s often cited by world class swimmers as being 70-80% of the

--- Page 69 Text ---
propulsive power in the stroke.
Without an effective kick, it’s really difficult to swim breaststroke fast.
The best drill to work on improving your kicking technique, speed, power,
and efficiency is called “heel tag.” It’s relatively simple to execute and will
do wonders for beginner and advanced swimmers.
H :
EEL TAG
Start on your back and place your hands at your side underneath your butt
as if you’re handcuffed. You want your hands to rest directly under your
bottom with your palms facing down to the bottom of the pool. While
floating on your back, begin the breaststroke kick by bringing your heels
back to touch your hands. Your feet should be flexed at this point, and you
should focus on using your hamstrings to bring your heels back towards your
bottom.
The key with this first part of the kick is to keep your knees under the
surface of the water while also keeping your knees relatively close together.
You should not have your knees separate wider than your shoulders by the
time your heels touch your palms. For most people, this is about half a meter
in width.
Once your heels touch your palms, now you begin the propulsive phase of
the kick! With your feet flexed, bring your feet back together using the
bottoms of your feet to “pull” the water until your ankles touch each other. At
the end of the kick phase, you should point your toes and glide. Similarly to
the different phases to the overall breaststroke stroke, when you kick, you
should have a glide at the end of each kick repetition.
An easy way to understand the kick timing is to say to yourself: up, out,
around, and together. That is the entire timing of the breaststroke kick. Bring
your heels “up” to your butt, then bring your heels “out” by laterally rotating
your heels just outside your body-line, then bring your heels back “around
and together” back to the starting position. Think to yourself, “up, out,
around, and together” every time you go through the kick motion in this drill.
This drill can also be done on your stomach. The only thing that
complicates this movement is the breathing. Simply insert a breath before
starting the motion, so the timing becomes: Breath, up, out, around, and
together. There should be a moment to glide before taking the next breath to
repeat the cycle.
Another variation of this drill to focus on kick technique is holding your

--- Page 70 Text ---
arms in a streamline position while you float on your back or stomach.
The only difference with this variation is you’ll no longer be able to touch
your heels to your hands and instead rely on your vestibular awareness to
bring your heels back far enough. Kicking in streamline on your back is the
best way to train the breaststroke kick over longer durations while improving
technique. Just be sure to keep your knees under the surface of the water the
best you can when kicking on your back in streamline.
Pullout
I was debating adding this section to the chapter because the breaststroke
pullout has evolved so much in the last two decades. Today, elite swimmers
are traveling a full 15 meters underwater off the wall in every length of a
breaststroke race. It’s incredible to watch but frustrating if you don’t know
how to do it.
Let’s backup, what is a breaststroke pullout?
A pullout is something that’s performed only in breaststroke—when you
push off the wall or dive in for a start. It’s used to maintain momentum from
the wall or dive and carry more speed into the first full stroke over the water.
It’s performed by starting in a streamline position. This is how you should
push off the wall every time you start a length of any stroke, but in
breaststroke, you’re legally allowed to do a full stroke underwater before
surfacing. The way this works is after you begin to feel yourself slowing
down in the streamline position, you take a full arm pull bringing your hands
down to your hips.
Once you begin to slow down in this position, you then bring your hands
back to streamline and take one kick before starting a full breaststroke stroke
over the water. At any point during the underwater phase, you can also take
one dolphin kick to help propel yourself forward. The best swimmers in the
world usually do this before separating their hands in streamline to initiate
the pull down.
This may sound a bit tricky, so I encourage you to refer to the
complementary online course videos to see it in action. It’s really important
in all phases of the breaststroke pullout to focus on reducing drag. The goal
of a pullout is to maintain your speed off the wall or dive. You’ll never
generate more propulsive power from the pullout than when you dove in the
water or pushed off the wall.
This is something to keep in mind when focusing on improving your

--- Page 71 Text ---
pullout. The goal is maintenance of speed versus generating new speed.
Surely the dolphin kick and arm pull down will create propulsion, but that’s
designed to keep you moving underwater. This is how some of the best
swimmers in the world are able to travel 15 meters underwater before taking
a single stroke on top of the water.
Training
When we put it all together, there are a lot of areas to improve in
breaststroke. From mastering the timing, pull, kick, and streamline there are a
lot of opportunities to improve regardless of how fast or proficient you
already are. Beyond mastering the stroke mechanics, there is massive
potential to swim faster just by being smarter with your training.
In the short axis strokes, it’s paramount to swim with a high body
position, with proper stroke technique, and at a high intensity. This is less
true for freestyle and backstroke because you can still swim those two strokes
“easy” and not sacrifice stroke timing and technique. Breaststroke is a beast
on its own and should be treated as such in training.
Specifically, focus on training with fantastic stroke length and intensity at
all times in breaststroke. This applies to butterfly as well, and we’ll discuss
this more in the next chapter. When choosing a workout or creating your own
for breaststroke, I’d recommend giving preference to shorter distances with
higher repetitions and increased rest. For example, rather than swimming a
300 breaststroke continuously, break it up into 6 x 50s.
Rather than swimming 6 x 50s with only 5 seconds rest, swim those same
6 x 50s with 15-20 seconds rest. Give yourself the opportunity to swim a little
bit faster, with more power per stroke, and give yourself the appropriate rest
needed to do so. Think about swimming sets that are Ultra Short Race Pace
Training (USRPT). This is a style where you swim high repeat counts of a
shorter distance at race pace. More on this in the FAQs at the end of the
book.
When it comes to swimming a faster breaststroke, just remember that the
goal is always to perform the stroke with optimal stroke technique at
intensities that simulate a desired result. Often, this is easiest to execute when
the stroke is broken up into different parts. For example, swimming sets that
target different parts of the stroke like the kick or pull in order to focus on
executing these stroke elements with more impact.
If your goal is leisure swimming and you’re not concerned with how fast

--- Page 72 Text ---
it takes you to get to the end of the pool, then don’t worry so much about
training at race pace. However, breaking up the stroke into different parts to
train is still a great way to improve the kick, pull, and timing of the stroke for
swimmers of all levels!

--- Page 73 Text ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
Butterfly
B one of the most difficult strokes to master and probably the
UTTERFLY IS
most tiring of all the competitive strokes. There’s a few reasons for this that
we’ll get into in this chapter, but the goal is not to simply swim butterfly for
survival. I want you to thrive when you swim butterfly!!
Swimming butterfly with an efficient stroke requires extra energy and
advanced technique knowledge. If you’re new to butterfly, it might feel
impossible! But trust me, it’s not. I’m going to break down the basics of the
stroke and share my favorite drills to help you perfect your technique and
swim faster!
Even if you’re more experienced in butterfly, you’d be surprised just how
much you can improve by reinforcing some of the fundamental skills in your
technique. Butterfly is a relatively “new” stroke, so we are always learning
and adapting to innovations in technique and training!
You’re saying butterfly is new?
Yes! Butterfly was developed in the 1930s as a style of swimming
breaststroke. A few innovative swimmers realized that they could swim
breaststroke faster if they recovered their arms over the water. After just a
few years of this, more and more swimmers started to recover their arms
forward above the water and the swimming term ‘butterfly’ – was born.
By 1956, Butterfly became an official race in the Olympic Games hosted
in Melbourne, and the rest is history! As you can see, butterfly is new,
innovative, and will continue to evolve for decades to come! Let’s explore
how you can swim butterfly faster and smarter than ever before!

--- Page 74 Text ---
FLOW
Have you ever been completely immersed in something you’re doing?
Oblivious to the outside world, your only focus is on the progress you’re
making on what you’re doing right then and there! Maybe you’ve been doing
something you love, like playing the piano, walking in nature, or maybe even
swimming. It’s like you’re in a different world, a different dimension!
This surreal experience is called “flow” in the world of psychology. Flow
is one of life’s highly enjoyable states of being; when we’re immersed in the
present. Our mind and body are fully engaged in what we’re doing. When we
swim, this is our aspired state of mind and body.
In order to achieve it, we must be willing and able to connect our entire
body to the water. This couldn’t be more true than when we swim butterfly. It
is truly a total body experience, and in order to feel a state of “flow” in the
water, we must focus on connecting to the water.
How might we do this, you might ask.
With “Flow drill,” of course! This is my favorite drill for butterfly and
improving underwater dolphin kick. It engages the entire body from finger
tips to toes while also stimulating the mind.
F D
LOW RILL
In order to perform this drill, start by pushing off the wall in a Superman
position on your stomach with your arms extended and on the surface of the
water.
Superman flies with his hands fisted. But for this drill, you’ll want your
hands open and fingertips at the surface of the water. Use your upper body to
press your chest down allowing your hips to rise up above the water. Your
face is looking down, and the goal of the drill is to mimic a dolphin motion
on the surface of the water. Your head should remain on the surface of the
water with your eyes looking down.
Your body should look like a sine curve on a graph, oscillating up and
down equally. Although most of the forward momentum is being generated
by your chest and hips moving up and down, this motion actually starts with
your palms and extends to your toes. Focus on using every centimeter of
musculature of your body including the top of your diaphragm down through
your hip flexors and quads.
Don’t forget that the dolphin motion has an up and down force, meaning
you’ll need to engage musculature on your backside as well including your

--- Page 75 Text ---
lower back, glutes, and hamstrings. This is the fundamental body position in
butterfly. When you need to breathe, lift your head up, or use a snorkel.
Using fins helps a lot to really feel forward progress with this drill. Engage
your entire body, and find your flow!
Pull
Now that you have the body rhythm down, it’s time we discuss what your
arms should be doing! Without overcomplicating the stroke, think of the pull
phase of the butterfly stroke as two freestyle strokes happening at the same
time. Your arms and hands should be directly in front of your shoulders at the
start of the pull.
As you press your chest forward and down, you’ll catch the water with
your hand, forearm, and upper part of your arm. Your goal is to achieve an
early vertical forearm with both arms simultaneously. Anchor the water with
your hands and forearms and pull yourself forward.
There are two core differences between the butterfly pull and a freestyle
pull.
Difference 1: The first core difference is the rotational momentum that
occurs in freestyle. When you extend your arm in freestyle, your body is
rotated slightly to the side of the arm that’s extended. Then, the pull initiates
and follows in the same line as your shoulder with rotation. When you swim
butterfly, there is no rotation, so your pull pattern will naturally be different.
When you swim butterfly, you should try to maintain your arms at
shoulder width throughout the pull phase underwater. Naturally, as you finish
the stroke, your hands and arms will come in closer to your body so that you
exit the water with your hands fully extended at your side. At this point, your
hands are past your waist and the goal is to keep your arms as straight as
possible on the recover phase.
Difference 2: The second core difference between the pull in freestyle and
butterfly is the timing and power of the stroke. In freestyle, you have a bit
more leniency in how long it takes to initiate an early vertical forearm and
just how fast you pull your arm through the water. In butterfly, on the other
hand, the pull needs to be more explosive and calculated.
There’s no such thing as a “slow butterfly pull.” This really throws off the
timing of the stroke and makes your technique much less efficient. Instead,
focus on pulling with power. As soon as you initiate the catch, your goal is to
accelerate your hands and arms to the finish of the pull phase. The over-water

--- Page 76 Text ---
recovery phase of the stroke should be controlled and relaxed.
When you recover your arms, focus on keeping your hands relaxed. Your
arms are straight and gracefully stretch over the water like a bird flying just
above the surface hunting for its prey. I once heard the expression “angel
arms” from a coach when instructing younger swimmers on how to recover
the arms in butterfly. I like this visualization because it creates a calming
mood for what should be a controlled and calculated phase of the stroke!
Butterfly Kick
The mechanics of the dolphin kick and timing of how the kick(s) align
with the butterfly stroke is very challenging for most beginner swimmers.
Ideally, your timing and body rhythm leads the body-line, and you don’t have
to over think how you kick in butterfly.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the underwater dolphin kick in great
detail. As a baseline, remember what I shared about flow—a total body
connection to the water. You want to undulate through the water, and the kick
in butterfly is truly a total body movement that starts with the upper abs and
extends through the diaphragm, finishing at the toes.
When you swim butterfly, there are two kicks for every stroke. This
means that there is a kick at the start of the pull and another kick at the end of
the pull. There are a few different ways you can think about this that will help
in timing this in your head. One way to describe this is by thinking about
kicking your arms forward in the stroke and then kicking your hands as you
finish the pull.
Ideally, both kicks should be similar in power and size. Naturally, one
will be larger just based on the mechanics of the stroke. Another way to think
about how you timing the kick with your arm pulls is to simply only focus on
one of the kicks. Focus on the kick that allows you to bring your arms around
to the front and press your chest down. This downward press of your chest
brings your hips up naturally.
B K D
UTTERFLY ICK RILL
A great drill to time the body motion and kicks in butterfly is by
swimming single arm butterfly. During this drill, you’ll breath to your side
with an almost-freestyle lille arm recovery. Focus on pressing your chest
down as your arm comes around. By focusing on just one stroke, and

--- Page 77 Text ---
swimming slightly to your side with a freestyle-type arm recovery, it will
make it much easier to feel the body rhythm of butterfly.
Your opposite arm should be held in a neutral streamline position while
the other arm is taking strokes. Give it a shot with shorter distances and
alternate arms every two or three strokes. This is a great drill that can be
incorporated in butterfly training. This can be done by alternating 25s or 50s
with this drill and the full butterfly stroke.
Breathing
So how do you breathe?
I’ve seen swimmers with incredible butterfly stroke mechanics swim at
near world-record speed, until they take a breath. The greatest of all time,
Michael Phelps was known for breathing every single stroke in all of his
butterfly races. This makes sense. When you breathe, you have to lift your
head up, which drops your body position and disrupts the stroke.
This can all be minimized dramatically if your timing and stroke
mechanics are correct. If you’re off on the timing, then taking a breath will
feel like a chore. Ideally, you take the breath right as you initiate the catch
phase with your hands and an early vertical forearm position. Lift your face
out of the water looking forward and try to keep your chin right at the surface
of the water.
Keep in mind, when you breathe, you only need to lift your head high
enough to make a clear path for air to enter through your mouth. Lifting your
head too high or holding your head for too long out of the water will cause
your hips to sink and lose forward momentum. You should leave your chin
above the surface of the water through the duration of the pull phase. Then,
as you begin to recover your arms, lower your chin and face back under the
surface.
Your head should return to the neutral body line position with your eyes
looking at the bottom of the pool by the time you finish the recovery phase.
As your head lowers into the water, you’ll want to press your chest down to
raise your hips up. A great drill to focus on this timing is a drill I like to “best
balance distance.”
B B D D
EST ALANCE ISTANCE RILL
This drill is performed in the neutral “flow” body line. Your arms are

--- Page 78 Text ---
extended above your head floating on the surface of the water. You start by
taking three dolphin kicks. Then, on the third dolphin kick, initiate an arm
pull and take a breath. Rather than swimming continuous butterfly, you pause
your arm movement to re-calibrate in the neutral flow position between
strokes. Three dolphin kicks, then 1 stroke and a breath, and repeat!
Focus on the timing of the pull in relation to the breath and dolphin kicks.
Each stroke cycle is an opportunity to rehearse this. I recommend only doing
this in increments of 25 or 50 meters with plenty of rest to feel fresh for each
attempt.
Training
Similar to breaststroke, butterfly is a short axis stroke! There is no
rotational momentum like in freestyle and backstroke, and therefore, proper
mechanics and timing become critical at every speed of the stroke. When we
train butterfly, it must be done with a focus on keeping a high body posture in
the water at close to race pace.
This doesn’t mean sprinting butterfly all the time in workout. That would
lead to extreme stroke fatigue and you wouldn’t be able to swim more than
100 or 200 meters in a single workout session. Instead, focus on swimming
butterfly with easy speed. You want to feel like you’re moving quickly with
great stroke fundamentals without taxing your body’s energy reserves.
E S B D
ASY PEED UTTERFLY RILL
The easiest way to achieve this “easy speed” approach is by swimming
shorter distances of butterfly. Rather than swim a 200m butterfly straight,
swim 4 x 50s or 8 x 25s. Give yourself adequate rest and train your body to
swim shorter distances, averaging a faster speed. This can also be done by
alternating butterfly with freestyle.
To create a more aerobic impact, rather than swimming a 5 x 100s
butterfly, instead swim 5 x 200s alternating 50 butterfly, 50 freestyle. This
will result in 500 meters of butterfly in total in a 1,000 meter set. This
concept of breaking apart the training into more manageable segments is how
the best swimmers in the world train short-axis strokes.
A great drill that focuses on developing a more powerful butterfly stroke
is swimming butterfly with a freestyle kick. Butterfly pull with freestyle kick
reinforces the underwater power phase of the stroke and actually flattens the

--- Page 79 Text ---
stroke to promote a higher tempo. I love doing this drill with fins for added
propulsion. Just like any drill, do it in moderation, over shorter distances to
ensure proper form and prevent over-fatigue.
Butterfly is an extremely taxing stroke on your body. It’s a great workout
and requires a high level of mental and physical engagement. Don’t be
intimidated by the challenge. Instead, embrace it and become one with the
water. Find your flow and swim like a dolphin. In the next chapter, we’ll dive
into how you can master your flow and swim like a dolphin under the water!

--- Page 80 Text ---
CHAPTER NINE
The 5th Stroke
U to be the 5th stroke of swimming!
NDERWATER STREAMLINE IS CONSIDERED
It is absolutely the fastest way for a human to move through the water – even
faster than swimming freestyle.
When you watch the Olympics on TV, you’ll see all the top athletes
dolphin kick underwater almost 15m off the start and after every turn. It’s a
dolphin, it’s a sailfish, it’s Michael Phelps surging ahead of the competition
with incredible underwater speed!
In short course swimming (25-yard or 25-meter pools), the underwater
streamline push off the start and every turn makes up approximately two
thirds of the entire race. Even if you’re not a competitive swimmer, recognize
that by improving your underwater dolphin kick and streamline off the wall
you’ll be able to carry more speed into the swimming phase of each lap.
Remember that the fastest part of the length is when you dive in or push
off the wall. The rest of the time you’re decelerating so you may as well carry
as much speed as possible from an underwater streamline into your first
stroke.
Aquatic Prowess
Like anything in life, if you want to be the best at something, look at what
the best are currently doing. If we apply this to underwater swimming, we
might look at top swimmers like Michael Phelps or Natalie Caughlin. Both
dominated their competition and made headlines for how impressive their
underwater streamlines were.
If we take an even higher level view on the concept of underwater

--- Page 81 Text ---
swimming, we should look beyond the human race. If we truly want to learn
from the best, we must look to our aquatic friends under the surface: Fish. In
essence, fish are the most efficient creatures through water because the water
is their home!
A Black Marlin can reach a top speed of 129 kilometers per hour
underwater! It’s amazing to think that a fish can move at highway driving
speeds underwater. The Black Marlin has to propel itself through a medium
of resistance that’s 800x more dense than air. Incredible!
The Black Marlin is not alone! Sailfish have been clocked at 109
kilometers per hour and swordfish can reach up to 100 kilometers per hour.
Even Penguins, which are technically considered birds, can reach speeds of
up to 35 kilometers per hour underwater.
The fastest humans can streamline kick up to 10 kilometers per hour
underwater which is approximately 2.5 meters per second. That’s blazing but
still less than one tenth the speed of our aquatic friends. Underwater
streamline truly is the 5th stroke. How is this possible, and what can we learn
from our aquatic friends to be more fish-like underwater?
Marine Physics
Think of your body as a sine wave, a mathematical curve that illustrates a
smooth periodic oscillation. If you follow the curve through the origin of a
graph, it goes up and down in a smooth motion. In a perfect world, the
oscillation is even both above and below the x-axis.
If you watch a dolphin or any fish swim underwater, what appears to be a
wiggle motion is actually an equally balanced oscillation to create forward
propulsion. In this analogy think of the amplitude of the oscillation as the
total size of your dolphin kick. When you kick both underwater and in all the
applicable strokes, focus on kicking in both directions.
Even if you can kick with a perfectly symmetrical dolphin kick, you’ll
still be much slower than a fish casually swimming through the water. So,
why is this?
Well, for starters, we as humans are not built perfectly symmetrically to
be able to produce an even dolphin or flutter kick. A fish, on the other hand,
can have an even up-and-down or side-to-side propulsion motion. When we
think about this from a physics perspective, it makes sense.
Not only is the fish symmetrical or at least more-symmetrical, but a fish
uses its entire frame length to create propulsion. A fish is able to apply

--- Page 82 Text ---
pressure at every point of its frame length. As humans, we’re built with stiff
bones and relatively inflexible body parts.
We only have three major points of inflection to create propulsion with
our bodies. We have our hips, which provide the largest pivot point of our
body. Next, we have our knees, which provide a relatively poor pivot point
for our lower body. Finally, we have our ankles, which like our knees, only
bend in one direction.
We as humans are really only about 10-20% efficient in using our full
frame length for dolphin kick. This explains why fish can swim up to 10x our
speed underwater. This also explains why some of the best swimmers in the
world can swim so quickly underwater. It’s a combination of body
awareness, technique, physical strength, and flexibility that allows some
swimmers to move up to 10 kilometers per hour underwater.
Technique
Increasing your body’s surface area to generate forward propulsion is the
fundamental way to streamline faster underwater. Your goal should be to
increase your frame’s efficiency and apply more pressure with more surface
area in both the up and down direction of the kick.
The amplitude of your kick refers to the total distance from the top of the
kick curve to the bottom of the kick curve. In other words, the highest point
your toes reach and lowest point your heels reach. This is the total water
displacement of your underwater dolphin kick.
If your kick amplitude is big, then you’ll get more propulsion but also
increase the amount of drag you create. If your amplitude is too small, then
you’ll miss out on added propulsion. Everyone’s kick amplitude is different
depending on flexibility, body type, and general strength. Just keep in mind,
you have less and less strength at the outer range of your kick amplitude.
In order to kick faster, you should focus on increasing your distance per
kick while maintaining your kick tempo. This will happen when you increase
your body’s surface area creating the propulsion and also develop more
strength. You might see top swimmers move their hands to initiate the
underwater dolphin kick. In these instances, the hands are more like a
stabilizer to elongate the body’s frame. Power doesn’t come from the hands,
it comes from your rib cage down to the toes.
While this might sound complicated to develop and improve upon, it's
really not. Here’s three tips on how to balance the size of your kick, increase

--- Page 83 Text ---
propulsion, and minimize resistance.
3 Tips To Improve
1. Focus on two-directional kicking
Unlike a fish, our frames are not symmetrical. It’s much easier for us to
walk forward than in reverse. We can kick a soccer ball in front of us much
more easily than behind us. You get the picture. Because of this, we must
think about and train our body to kick in both directions.
In one direction of the kick, we engage our abs, hip flexors, and quads. In
the opposite direction, we use our lower back, glutes, and hamstrings. You
can think of this second phase of the kick as the “recovery” portion of the
kick only because it’s the segment in time when we’re re-positioning our
body to the more powerful direction of the kick.
I’m hesitant to use the word “recovery” because you do, in fact, generate
propulsion during this phase. Although you can not generate as much power,
you do create a propulsive force that drives you forward. Beginners are
generally only proficient in the phase of the kick that leverages the natural
pivot strength of our hips, knees, and ankles. This part of the kick mimics
kicking a soccer ball.
The best underwater kickers apply forward pressure in both directions of
the kick. In training, you need to focus on the reverse of the powerful part of
the kick in order to return more quickly to the more powerful part of the kick.
The closer you can get to the symmetrical sine graph, the more evenly
distributed your power will be and the faster you’ll go underwater.
Focus on using your hips and not bending your knees too much. Your
body should look like a dolphin underwater, not a struggling fifth-round pick
soccer player underwater. Just keep your kick amplitude inline with the rest
of your body, and you’ll be swimming like a dolphin in no time!
2. Train the dolphin kick in all four planes of motion
The most creative and impactful way to train your underwater dolphin
kick is to kick in different body positions. This means developing balance
and technical proficiency kicking on your front, back, and sides. This can be
done in streamline on your stomach with a snorkel or on your back in
streamline.

--- Page 84 Text ---
Kicking in every body position will improve your body’s feel of the
water. The goal is to develop a fish-like sense of flow underwater. This can
only be done by spending time awakening the acute nerve endings in your
skin and engaging your body’s musculature. The more muscle fibers you can
engage doing drills where you kick in all four planes of motion, the more
impactful your dolphin kick training will be.
I love doing these drills with fins. Flow drill on the surface of the water
with fins and a snorkel is a fantastic way to develop a strong dolphin kick by
focusing on engaging the core musculature. You can also kick on your side
with one arm extended forward. This is a great drill for not only developing
underwater dolphin kick but also the body motion for the butterfly stroke.
3. Increase flexibility, ankle mobility, and functional strength
Your body is a vessel! When you train different components of each
stroke and technique, you improve the versatility of your vessel. The more
refined you can become as an athlete in the water, the more you’ll improve as
a swimmer. This means improving flexibility, developing functional strength
and overall body awareness in the water.
In the following sections, we’ll discuss in more detail strength training
out of the water, but just remember that improving your strength is just one
component of developing a strong underwater dolphin kick. Consider your
flexibility and technique as well to swim faster and smarter underwater.
Focus on kicking with your hips and training all four planes of motion.
You’ll see (and feel) the results after just a few sessions. We all aspire to
swim underwater like our aquatic friends, so practice everyday, and you’ll be
swimming with the fish in no time.

--- Page 85 Text ---
MAIN SET II:
Out of the Water

--- Page 86 Text ---
INTRODUCTION
Swimming is more than just going back and forth in a lap pool until you get
tired. It is more than swimming a 1,000-meter or 5,000-meter workout. It
goes deeper than developing a feel for the water and building aerobic
capacity in the water. To understand how to truly optimize your potential in
the water, we need to approach swimming from a holistic perspective!
Holistic fitness includes what you do in the water as well as on land. It
includes strength training, nutrition, recovery, and your mental mindset. In
this section, we’ll explore the out of water elements that contribute to our
performance in the water. This approach will yield not only the best
performance but also the most enjoyment. You’ll also reduce your chances of
injury so you can keep swimming later in life.

--- Page 88 Text ---
CHAPTER TEN
Strength Training
D ?
ID YOU SKIP LEG DAY
Of course not!
Swimmers lift legs every single day!
We do?
Eh, sort of...
What does that even mean? If you’re confused, this is how most
swimmers feel when it comes to any sort of physical exercise out of the
water. Fear not, this chapter is going to be highly informative! If you have
done any workouts on land outside of the pool, you have a head start on most
of the swimming population.
Swimmers have the unfortunate reputation of being clumsy and poorly
balanced outside of the water. I would argue this used to be more true for
anyone who grew up swimming before the year 2000. Since then, our
fundamental understanding of training outside of the pool has advanced
dramatically.
Today, we have a better understanding of human physiology and strength
training. This is one reason why more swimmers are faster today than 10 or
20 years ago. This is true for every age group. 18 year olds are faster than
ever, and similarly, 58-year-olds continue to break masters world records.
Swimming is the fountain of youth! Whether you intend to swim well
into your 90s or if you’re more concerned with breaking a world record, in
this chapter we’re going to explore strength and conditioning, otherwise
referred to as “dryland training.”

--- Page 89 Text ---
What is dryland training, exactly?
To put it simply, dryland training (a.k.a. Strength and Conditioning)
involves using your own bodyweight or equipment, like dumbbells or
resistance bands, to develop muscle, strength, and power. If you’re new to
any of this, getting started might seem a little intimidating, but implementing
strength training into your swimming routine will help in a massive way.
You can start with bodyweight exercises that require no equipment, are
total body, and will give you a great workout. As you develop your balance,
posture, and strength, you can increase your frequency of training and start to
add equipment. Later in the chapter, I will share my top bodyweight exercises
that require no equipment.
Why do dryland training?
Most forms of dryland training have numerous benefits for swimmers.
The main motivation for many swimmers is the potential to increase
performance. By building strength out of the water, you’ll be able to apply
this newfound herculean strength in the pool or open water to swim faster.
Dryland training can develop your core strength, explosive power, and
general aerobic fitness as well.
A less common but equally important reason to do dryland training is to
prevent injury. We’ll go deeper into this topic in the next chapter, but as a
baseline, understand that overuse injuries are common in swimming. Dryland
adds variety to your workouts and engages your muscles in different ways,
which can realign your posture in the water and reduce your chances of
injury.
Something I love about dryland training is how engaging it can be both
physically and mentally. Doing the same or similar workouts in the pool can
become monotonous. There’s something about pushing your body on land
that’s different than doing it in the pool.
I also love dryland training because it’s an opportunity to mix things up.
It’s like a breath of fresh air, literally! You can avoid burnout by mixing up
your training and doing creative dryland workouts to stay mentally on top of
your workout routine.
Finally, if for whatever reason, if you don’t have access to a pool to train
in, you can still get in a great workout. Sometimes you're traveling, on a tight
schedule, or there’s a global pandemic that has shut down all your local
pools.

--- Page 90 Text ---
Regardless, no pool, no excuses!
Types of Dryland Training
Before we get into specific physiological movements, it’s important to
understand the different types of training you can do out of the water.
Similarly to a swim workout, there are different variables that we can tweak
to achieve a desired outcome. This includes the specific exercise, which is
analogous to the type of stroke we swim.
There’s also the duration of the activity, number of reps, and intensity of
each specific set or rep. You can also manipulate the amount of rest you have
between each set or repetition. All these variables contribute to the type of
workout you will execute. A few major types are listed below:
Muscle Endurance Training: This is a more beginner-friendly type
of workout. You can start by lifting a higher volume, meaning more
reps and sets, with lighter weights. This allows your tissues to build
up tolerance for more intense training programs later. You can
focus on technique rather than trying to add weight. Remember, you
can't expect to make progress when you constantly have to stop
because you're completely out of breath.
Circuit Training: This involves going through a series of several
exercises until you reach the last one, resting, and then repeating all
the exercises again. Think of a circuit as a set group in a pool
workout. Often, a circuit will run multiple rounds through with
minimal or no rest between each exercise. You can modify this kind
of workout to align with your specific strength goals. You can
manipulate your work-to-rest ratio in circuits depending on what
kind of training effect you're after.
Hypertrophy Training: Strength training can be used to increase the
size of your muscles. This type of training is the least useful for
swimmers. You also have to be lifting medium-to-high reps of a
moderate to heavy weight consistently to see significant changes to
the size of your muscles. In other words, dryland training a couple
times a week isn't going to make you look massive. This is actually
a good thing, because carrying around unnecessary muscle mass
will only cause you to sink and slow you down in the water.

--- Page 91 Text ---
Max Strength Training: This type of training is best transitioned to
once you’ve built up your muscle endurance and mastered basic
technique using your body weight. This kind of training involves
bringing your number of repetitions down to about 3–6 and
increasing the amount of resistance or weight you’re moving.
Explosive Power Training: Explosive power training is more
advanced and not for beginners. This involves training at maximum
intensity for short periods of time. Olympic lifts are the most
common example of this. While many of these advanced
movements are reserved for those who have a bit more experience
in dryland training, this doesn’t mean you can’t train explosive
power without weights.
Plyometrics: also known as jump training or plyos, are exercises in
which muscles exert maximum force in short intervals of time, with
the goal of increasing power. Examples of this would include box
jumps, jump squats, and plyo push ups!
These types of movements on land translate to the water well because
you’re able to move in an explosive way without the resistance of water. You
can think of how pushing off the wall in streamline is similar to a burpee or a
jump squat!
A big misconception by swimmers is that you need to mimic the major
competitive strokes on land to gain strength in the water. This is not true, and
while focusing on swimming specific movements and muscle groups can be
beneficial, it shouldn't dominate your out of water strength training approach.
Instead of grabbing free weights and swinging your arms around to mimic
backstroke, it’s more important to focus on compound movements that
engage your core! Compound exercises work multiple muscle groups at the
same time. For example, a squat is a compound exercise that works the
quadriceps, glutes, and calves.
When you perform a compound movement like a squat, your core is
engaged in order to balance your weight through the movement. This is
important in swimming because when you balance your body in the water,
your core must be activated to maintain a high body position. Let’s explore
some “swimming specific” movements that can amplify this.

--- Page 92 Text ---
Swimming-Specific Movements
Swimming-specific movements focus on stability, flexibility, and
strength. When you’re just getting started, it’s important to focus on
compound exercises. This ensures you use the muscle groups that will be
engaged when you swim!
Working on balance, core strength, and overall stability helps improve
your body position and shoulder strength in the water. Increasing flexibility
will boost your reach and distance per stroke. The more muscular endurance
you have, the longer you’ll be able to maintain proper technique, and thus the
faster you will swim!
Continuous strength gain leads to an increase in propulsion, power, and
muscle engagement in the pool. Before I go over a few basic dryland
exercises, remember that proper technique is critical. Also, consult a
physician before beginning any new routine, and of course be sure to check
out the video continent in the supplemental online course for demonstrations
of each of these exercises.
Dryland Exercises Without Equipment:
Plank: Strong swimming starts with a strong core! For the plank, place
your hands under your shoulders. Try not to hyperextend your elbows.
Creating a straight line from your shoulders to your heels, tuck your pelvis
under, and squeeze your butt to maximize core engagement. Think about
squeezing your belly button to your spine! You can make this exercise a bit
easier by Planking with your knees on the ground, or by placing your hands
on an elevated surface.
Squats: Squats will help with general lower body strength for kicking, as
well as increasing strength and power for starts and turns. To squat, start with
your feet slightly wider than your shoulders. Tuck your pelvis under to
remove the arch from your back. Engage your core and drop down into a
squat. Engage your glutes and core and drive yourself back up. If you need to
make the exercise a bit easier, while improving your technique,, squat to a
chair to help with balance.
Pushup: Start in a plank position, with your hands slightly wider than
your shoulders. Lower yourself down by bending your elbows, but don't let
your shoulders round or shrug! Keep your core and glutes engaged. Pushups
will develop your core and upper body strength. To make this exercise easier,
pushups can be performed on your knees.

--- Page 93 Text ---
Dead Bug: Lie on your back with your knees bent at a 90° angle and feet
off the ground. Extend your hands straight to the ceiling. Extend your right
leg and left hand, keeping your opposite arm and leg in the same position.
Return to the starting position and repeat on the other side. This can be done
with or without a Swiss ball.
Standing ITYW: This exercise strengthens the smaller shoulder muscles
that support your rotator cuff. Start by standing tall, then raise your arms
forming the letters with your body. I, T, Y, and finally W where your hands
are at the same height as your face and you focus on bringing your shoulder
blades back to each other.
Superman Extensions: Begin by laying on your stomach with your arms
straight out in front of you on the ground. Looking straight down at the floor
and keeping your core engaged, lift your arms and legs off the ground. Hold
for 1 to 2 seconds and release. This exercise strengthens the small stabilizer
muscles in your back to prevent injury!
Hip Bridges: Start lying on your back with your feet planted on the
ground. Make sure your lower back is completely flat to the ground. Squeeze
your butt and lift up into a bridge position. Hold for 1-2 seconds, making sure
your back doesn't arch at the top. Bridges help strengthen the core, glutes,
and lower back to prevent injury.
Leg Lifts: Start by laying on your back. With your feet together, point
your toes and lift your heels off the ground to a 45° angle to the floor, then
lower them to a few centimeters above the ground. To make this easier, place
your hands under your bum.
Russian Twists: Sit on the floor, with your torso at a 45° angle. Keeping
your back straight, clasp your hands in front of you and rotate side to side.
You can keep your heels on the floor for extra stability or float them off the
ground. Russian twists develop rotational core strength, which is important
for backstroke and freestyle.
Lunge: Stand tall, take a big step back with one leg until your knee almost
touches the ground. Then take that same step forward returning both feet
together. Repeat with your opposite leg.
Many of the above exercises can be performed with variations that can
add complexity and difficulty. Start by mastering the basics, then move to
more complicated versions, durations, and add equipment! Below are a series
of compound movements that require equipment.

--- Page 94 Text ---
Dryland Exercises With Equipment:
Pullups (Pullup Bar): For a standard grip pullup, grab the pull up bar just
wider than shoulder width. Your palms should face away from your body,
and your goal should be to pull yourself up from a hanging position so that
your chin rises above the level of your hands. The wider apart your hands are,
the more difficult this exercise becomes. There are many variations of pull
ups, and each version engages your upper body muscles differently. This
upper body strength is most applicable to the pulling motion in all the
competitive strokes.
Rows (Dumbbells or Bands): Similarly to pullups, rows work the upper
body while also developing stability! If you’re using resistance bands, drop
into a squat position and grip both handles of the band. Pull the handles
toward you, keeping your elbows in tight to form a 90° angle. Slowly return
to starting position and repeat, holding the squat position for the duration of
the interval. This can be performed sitting on a Swiss ball, alternating arms,
with dumbbells in a horizontal position, or with a machine.
Squats (Dumbbell, Barbell, Bands): Similarly to when you squat without
any resistance, you want to keep a stable body posture. When you squat with
weight it’s important to pull your bum back and keep your chest up. Focus on
keeping your knees behind your toes through the entire range of the squat. I
like holding a single dumbbell at my chest level with both of my hands. This
is called a “goblet squat” and it’s great for developing leg strength and core
stability.
Romanian DeadLift (Dumbbell, Barbell, Bands): Use an overhand grip to
hold a barbell bar at hip level. Draw your shoulders back and keep your spine
straight. Push your hips back as you slowly lower the bar toward your feet.
Press your hips forward to come into a standing position with the barbell in
front of your thighs. Your knees should be bent slightly. This can be done
with Kettlebells as well balancing on a single leg through the movement.
Chest Press (Dumbbell, Barbell, Bands): Similar to a pushup that focuses
on engaging your upper body; however, with the chest press, you’re on your
back and pushing the weight above your body. Lie flat on your back on a
bench. Grip the barbell or dumbbells with hands just wider than shoulder-
width apart, so when you're at the bottom of the movement of your move
your hands are directly above your elbows. Bring the bar slowly down to
your chest as you breathe in. Breathe out as you push the bar up. This is also
a great exercise to do with resistance bands.

--- Page 95 Text ---
Transferring Strength into the Water
So by now, I hope you’re sold that incorporating dryland training into
your workout routine is important for a few main reasons. The first being that
we know it can prevent injury. This is done by correcting for muscle
imbalances in your shoulders and strengthening your core.
Dryland training will also help increase stroke rate by allowing you to
take more strokes in less time with more power. This out of water training
will also improve distance per stroke by allowing for more power application
per stroke. This allows you to swim further with less effort. The goal of any
dryland program for swimmers is to become stronger and more explosive in
the water while decreasing your risk of injury.
When you swim, focus on maximizing your distance off the wall in
streamline. Take fewer strokes by applying more power per stroke. Think
about engaging your core when you swim. Ride high in the water like a
hydroplane. When you feel tired, don’t let your stroke count fall. Keep your
strokes long, and engage your entire body when you swim!
Dryland Training Tips for Beginners
Start with a plan! Don’t try and make it up as you go. You’re more likely

--- Page 96 Text ---
to get hurt and waste your time by just winging it in the gym. In the pool, you
can actually get away with this by swimming back and forth without injury.
You can’t do the equivalent in the gym. Just imagine doing 30 minutes of
pushups continuously. This is why I strongly encourage you to check out the
workout examples in the supplemental online course and the dryland training
programs in the MySwimPro app!
Also, start with a routine that feels manageable. Use your judgment (or
consult a personal trainer) to figure out what works for you. If you’re
struggling on the third rep out of ten, then the weight is too heavy.
Alternatively, if you find reps 8–10 of that same set to be challenging with
the weight you picked, it’s likely the right amount of weight, assuming you
have proper technique. As you start to build strength, you can gradually
increase your weight load from week to week.
It’s also important to make the most of your warm-up time. Taking time
to properly warm up is the fitness equivalent to turning your car engine on in
the winter a few minutes before you get going! You can maximize your pre-
workout time before strength training by doing dynamic stretches.
Finally, avoid working out to exhaustion. This applies both in and out of
the water. You should end your set and workout just before you completely
drain your body. You want to finish the workout feeling strong, not like
you’ve just been defeated. That being said, don’t be afraid to push it, just be
smart and listen to your body!
Let’s get after it!

--- Page 97 Text ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Injury Prevention
J publishing this book, I challenged myself to swim every single
UST PRIOR TO
day for 30 days! I wanted to swim over 100,000 meters and raise awareness
for men’s health issues. I was successful in this journey and actually swam
over 120,000 meters by swimming 40 times in 30 days!
I was very proud to complete my 30-day swim challenge, and leading up
to this journey of swimming every single day, I was fearful that this increase
in training volume and frequency would result in injury. Luckily that was not
the case, but I did some strategic planning before starting this challenge to
reduce my chances of injury.
Outside of the pool, I did exercises that strengthened the muscles
immediately surrounding my shoulders. These stabilizer muscles that keep
the rotator cuff healthy need to be focused on and trained just like any other
part of our fitness routine.
Holistic swimming means training our body both in and out of the water.
In this chapter, we’ll explore how to keep our shoulders and other parts of our
body healthy so that we can swim without injury.
Why Do Injuries Happen?
Injuries in swimming are far too common, and for the most part, they’re
nearly all preventable. Being forced to put your routine on hold is no fun
because it takes away from making progress towards something we love.
Nearly half of all swimmers report some type of overuse injury.
There are a number of reasons this occurs. Most often, it’s poor
technique, muscle imbalances, not listening to your body, and having an

--- Page 98 Text ---
improper training routine. Combine these factors with a high frequency
motion like moving your arm over and over for a freestyle stroke, and it’s a
disaster waiting to happen.
Just think about how many arm strokes you take in a workout. How about
in a week, a month, or a year!? If you take 20 arm strokes per length, swim
5,000 meters per workout 5x/week. That totals 4,000 total arm rotations per
day, which is 2,000 rotations for each arm. That’s 10,000 rotations per week
per arm, and 40,000 rotations per arm per month. In one year, that’s nearly
half a million arm rotations. One million freestyle strokes! That’s insane!
Doing a million of anything is going to cause stress on your body,
especially if it’s done with resistance. Remember water is 800x more dense
than air. This is why swimming with proper technique is so important. You’ll
repeat the motion millions of times, literally!
Whether you've been exercising for years or are just starting a fitness
program, it's important to avoid injuries so you can keep moving closer to
your fitness goals. We become more vulnerable to injuries as we get older, in
part because we are less agile than we used to be, and we have also lost some
of our former bone and muscle mass. We can also lose flexibility as we age.
“Swimmer’s Shoulder”
Swimming freestyle or any stroke for that matter requires a highly
coordinated, synchronous pattern of muscle firing. USA Swimming ran a
survey among its olympic team and found that 66% of Olympic swimmers
had a history of shoulder pain and 14% missed a competition due to shoulder
pain.
Since our shoulders are the area of our body most likely to be impacted
by potential injury we should focus on this area first! Prevention is key, but if
you’ve already experienced pain or discomfort, many of the same principles
apply. There are four main causes of the illusive “swimmer’s shoulder” that
we’ll review how to prevent:
1. Muscle fatigue and overload
2. Rotator cuff tendonitis
3. Shoulder laxity
4. Impingement positions during swimming stroke

--- Page 99 Text ---
Prevention
Building off the last chapter on dryland training, it’s important to follow a
program that develops strength, endurance, muscle balance, and flexibility.
These principles are a given for any strength training routine, but focusing on
the elements below as they relate to swimming is key.
1. Strengthening the rotator cuff
2. Engaging scapular stabilizers
3. Focusing on the core: Lower back, abs, pelvis
4. Proper stretching:
5. Dynamic stretching before a workout
6. Static stretching after a workout
Below are a series of exercises that focus on developing strength and
stability in some of the core areas of the shoulder including the Scapula,
Deltoids, Rotator Cuff, and Pelvis. Be sure to check out the supplemental
online course for video demonstrations for all of these exercises. The training
programs included in the MySwimPro app include all of these exercises in
order to have a well-balanced workout experience.
Dryland Exercises for Injury Prevention
Scapula Pushups: Start in a plank position on the knees. Without bending
your elbows, lower your body from the shoulder joint. Think about sinking
your chest to the floor. Then, press the spot between your shoulder blades to
the ceiling, pressing your shoulder blades down and back. This movement
strengthens your serratus anterior and improves your scapular mobility to
support your shoulder joint and strengthen your pull in all four strokes.
Alphabet: Place a small ball in your palm, and place your palm against a
wall. I like using a tennis ball for this one. Extend your arm straight. Begin
writing the alphabet letter by letter by rolling the ball on the wall. Repeat
with both arms. While it may seem like you’re not doing much, you’re
actually engaging small small stabilizer muscles that support your rotator
cuff.
Internal Rotation: Begin lying on your right side, with your knees bent at
90°s. Keep your right arm close to your side and bend it 90°s. Place a weight
in your hand. Raise your right hand up toward your left shoulder and lower

--- Page 100 Text ---
down. Repeat on the left side. The weight should be minimal. The goal is
slow and controlled movements rather than fast powerful swings. These
exercises can also be done with a resistance band. The alternative of this
movement is the “External rotation,” which is the reverse of this movement
and strengthens different muscles for stability of the rotator cuff so both are
important.
Swiss Ball Alternating Superman: Stabilize your spine to build a strong
foundation for all four strokes. Begin with your stomach on a Swiss ball with
your hands and feet on the ground. Extend your right arm and left leg, hold
for a moment, and return to the starting position. Repeat with the left arm and
right leg. You can do this without a ball as well simply on your hands and
knees.
Cat Cow Tilts: Start on all fours. Inhale and round your back and tuck
your chin, looking down at your belly button. Exhale, arching your back and
looking up toward the sky. Repeat, taking deep breaths. This movement
strengthens and increases the flexibility of your pelvis, as it actually comes
from yoga. This is a great exercise for warming up and cooling down.
Training Modifications if You’re Injured
While I’d love to say that the exercises listed above and the routines
found in the supplemental online course will undoubtedly prevent injury,
that’s simply not true. You can dramatically lower your chances of injury by
focusing on improving technique and completing dryland exercises on a
regular basis.
Despite all the preventative care you may take, there are certainly
instances where injuries will pop up. When they do, it’s not the end of the
world, and certainly not the end of your swimming journey. If you’re injured
or simply over-fatigued, there are a few ways you can adapt your workout
routine in and out of the water.
Firstly, there are the duration and frequency of your training program. It’s
okay to take a day (or days) off. Reduce your volume, reduce your frequency,
and mix it up. You can change your strokes, remove paddles, and add more
kicking sets. You can also try something called vertical kicking where you
essentially start by treading water and then remove the support of your hands,
so that you’re only kicking in a vertical body position.
With vertical kicking, you can do flutter kick, dolphin kick, or
breaststroke kick. This can be done with your hands at the surface level of the

--- Page 101 Text ---
water, or with your arms above the water in streamline and everywhere in
between. I like mixing in vertical kicking sets even if I’m not injured just to
mix up training and focus on developing my kick strength.
Additionally, you can swim with fins. These allow you to increase
propulsion and decrease the load on your shoulders. For some swimmers
adding a pull buoy can have the same effect. If you have a lower body injury,
focusing on pulling with a pull buoy or just completely shutting off your legs
will help alleviate some of the stress caused by swimming.
Outside of the water, make sure you’re doing a dynamic warmup to
activate your muscles and get your heart rate elevated. This will get the blood
flowing and improve circulation before getting in the water. If you’re injured,
stop dryland training or swimming that causes pain. Additionally, stop other
non-swimming activities that cause pain or fatigue muscles that you know
will be needed for swimming.
When it comes to technique, focus on balancing your stroke cycle. If
you’re used to breathing only on one side, mix it up with bilateral breathing
and focus on balancing your technique. Rotate evenly to both sides and try
not to cross the midline with your hand entry or pull. Increase your body roll
to maximize your distance per stroke and use rotational momentum to
decrease stress on your shoulders.
Recovery
One of the major benefits of swimming for fitness is that it’s low impact
on your body. Unlike running or other land-based physical activity,
swimming doesn’t put as much wear and tear on your joints and muscles
(particularly your knees). Even though swimming may not cause the same
aches and pains of these other sports, it’s still important that you give
yourself an opportunity to recover after intense training or swimming
competitions.
Our body needs rest days (or at least recovery workouts) to perform at our
highest level and maximize the time we spend in the water. It’s important to
know a couple of things about recovery and rest in general:
Can you swim everyday? How long should you rest?
During strenuous exercise such as resistance training or aerobic threshold
intervals, muscle tissue develops micro-tears in response to stress.
Immediately following exercise, the recovery process begins through acute
inflammation.

--- Page 102 Text ---
An “active recovery” swim workout could be added or in place of higher
intensity swim workouts in a weekly routine. For example, swimming lower
volume at lower intensities will allow the body to stay active, circulate blood
and maintain a feel for the water without furthering the body’s level of
fatigue.
I personally like to swim every other day, alternating out of water dryland
training. Swimming is a great way to maintain the feel of the water while
serving as active recovery for my lifting session out of the water. When I
need to ramp up my training volume in the pool, I’ll keep track of how much
intensity vs. volume I do per workout and per week to make sure I’m not
burning myself out.
Dynamic Stretching vs. Static Stretching
Whether you swim every day or once per week, experts agree that a
dynamic warm-up prepares your body best for peak output and reduces your
chances of injury. Static stretching, on the other hand, can actually impair
performance and negatively impact shoulder stability if done before a swim
workout.
To clarify the differences between these two, just know that dynamic
stretching improves flexibility and range of motion, just like static stretching
does. However, when done before a workout, dynamic stretching can boost
your power and strength.
Dynamic stretching would be performing movements like arm swings,
arm circles, butt kicks, and dynamic hamstring stretch. Basically, movements
that stretch the muscle, but only for a short period of time. You don’t want to
hold the stretch before performing the workout. On the flip side, a static
stretch, is where you actually hold the position and perform several cycles of
breathing while in the position.
This could be reaching to touch your toes stretching the back of your legs,
or holding your arm parallel across your body to stretch your shoulder. Be
sure to check out the supplemental online course for full dryland warmups
and cool downs that can be done before and after workouts.
It’s important to remember that many injuries in swimming are due to
overuse and improper technique. The primary prevention strategy should be
establishing improving technique, establishing strength, muscle endurance,
and flexibility. Having a well balanced dryland routine will help increase
your odds of staying healthy so you can swim longer and continue to

--- Page 103 Text ---
improve!
Finally, always consult a physician if symptoms persist.

--- Page 104 Text ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
Nutrition
H you ever heard the expression, “you are what you eat”?
AVE
Does this mean if you eat a lot of carrots, you’ll turn orange? No, but on a
figurative level, you are in fact what you eat. I mean, think about it. Over the
course of a day, you might eat three to five times. Over the course of just one
year, that’s thousands of meals you will have eaten. Just think about all that
food!
Therefore, what you fuel your body with is critical to not only your
performance but also your overall health in and out of the water. Whether
your goal is to lose weight, gain muscle, or simply feel better, having the
right understanding of what to eat, when, and why can dramatically improve
your likelihood of success!
Nutrition for Swimmers
Diet affects performance at every level, and the foods that we choose in
training and competition will affect how well we perform in workouts. Even
beyond our workouts, our diet impacts how we feel, think and act at all hours
of the day. Our diet even impacts our sleep routine which is huge to our
recovery and feeling refreshed for the next day.
You need to be aware of your nutritional goals and of how to create an
eating strategy that meets those goals. Diet may have its biggest impact
during training, and a good diet will help support consistent intensive training
while reducing the risk of illness or injury.
Good food choices can also optimize the adaptations in muscle and other
tissues in response to the training stimulus. Everyone is different, and there is

--- Page 105 Text ---
no single diet that meets the needs of all people at all times. Your needs as a
human will change during the week, month, and year, so it’s important to be
flexible to accommodate this. Getting the right amount of energy to stay
healthy and to tolerate the changes in a workout routine is a key goal in
managing a balanced diet.
Consume too much and body fat increases: too little and performance
falls and illness results. Developing your ideal physique requires careful
integration of training and diet. Carbohydrates are a key nutrient for energy
supply, but the amount of carbohydrates depends on the training load and
therefore varies from day to day.
Protein is important and necessary for building and repairing muscles, but
a varied diet containing everyday foods will generally supply more than
enough protein. The timing and type of protein is as important as the amount
of protein in the diet. If you’re vegetarian, this is not a problem, as you can
still meet all your protein needs.
A nutrient-rich diet that meets energy needs and is based largely on
vegetables, fruits, beans, legumes, grains, lean animal meats, dairy produce
and oils should also ensure an adequate intake of vitamins and minerals.
Additionally, maintaining hydration is important for performance. An
adequate intake of fluid before, during, and after a workout is critical.
Food is an important part of our lives, and you should enjoy the foods that
you eat. In this chapter we’re going to overview how to fuel your body
before, during, and after workouts. We’ll also explore some different ways to
stay field and hydrated during all-day events like competitions, and longer
endurance swims.
The Nutrition Equation
Similar to the swimming equation, there’s an equation for nutrition, and
it’s actually even simpler! The equation states that our energy balance is
equal to the amount of energy we take in minus the amount of energy we
expend.
Energy Balance = Energy Intake – Energy Expenditure
Simply put, calories in minus calories out must be equal. If you’re trying
to lose weight, you must expend more calories than you’re intaking. This is
an overly simplified model, but it’s used to keep things in perspective and
really make you realize that you ultimately have a lot of control over your
body weight and energy output.

--- Page 106 Text ---
We can further this concept with regard to your energy in a singular
workout. All we have to do is break it down to the amount of energy you will
input to your body minus the total energy expenditure during the exercise
minus the background cost of being sedentary during this period. In other
words, you’re still burning calories even when you’re not swimming and just
standing at the wall between sets.
Energy Availability = Energy Intake – Energy Cost of Training (or
Competition)
Remember, swimming is a very demanding activity. Your body is
moving through a medium that’s 800x more resistive than air. This resistance
causes a high level of energy expenditure just to move forward. Your entire
body is engaged, your heart rate rises, and you expend energy, aka burning
calories!
So, how many calories do you burn while swimming?
The rate at which your body burns calories for energy is known as your
metabolism. When you exercise, this rate increases. Just how much and for
how long depends on a wide variety of factors including: gender, body
composition, and most importantly your level of exertion.
First, your weight plays a big role in how much you burn. Generally, the
more you weigh, the more you burn. Additionally, your metabolism is also an
important factor in how many calories are burned. In one hour of swimming,
a 130-pound person swimming freestyle will burn 590 calories swimming
fast, and 413 calories swimming slower. A 205-pound person on the other
hand swimming freestyle for one hour will burn 931 calories swimming fast,
and 651 calories swimming slower.
Freestyle is the most efficient stroke, and therefore burns the least calories
all things considered. Even though you’ll burn fewer calories at a relaxed
pace, swimming freestyle is the most sustainable stroke. Butterfly, on the
other hand, may burn up to twice as many calories per unit of time, but you
won't be able to swim butterfly for extended periods of time.
What to Eat Before, During, After Swimming?
If you are what you eat, it’s important you eat the right foods before,
during, and after swimming or your dryland workout. Below is a list of
recommended foods chosen not only for their nutritional value but also for
how your body feels after eating them.

--- Page 107 Text ---
NOTE: Always consult a nutritionist for specific and personalized
dietary recommendations. This is particularly important if you have
any dietary restrictions or allergies, e.g. Celiac’s.
Before Swimming
Ideally, a meal should be eaten 3-4 hours before a workout or
competition. It should provide 1.5 grams per pound of body weight of
carbohydrates. Adding small amounts of protein can aid in regulating energy
levels by slowing down the absorption of carbohydrates. So, what does this
mean in terms of real food?
Some meal ideas 3-4 hours before a workout or event include spaghetti
with meat sauce, pasta with chicken and vegetables, and grilled chicken with
rice. A turkey or tuna sandwich is also a good source of carbs and protein.
For snacks, think about adding an oatmeal raisin walnut granola bar, trail mix
with nuts or raisins, or a single serving of fruit juice.
If you’re eating 2-3 hours before a workout, consider eating a baked
potato, bagel with peanut butter, fruit smoothie, or oatmeal. You can also try
nonfat yogurt, pancakes, or fresh fruit. As you get closer to the workout,
you’ll need to reduce the overall amount of both carbohydrates and protein
you consume.
If you have one hour or less before your swim workout, you’ll want to eat
something light. Some great examples of this include raisins, a banana, a ½
bagel, a fig bar, or applesauce. Toast, crackers, and pretzels can be great, just
be sure to watch your portion size.
Additionally, you can consume a sports drink, but be sure that this drink
contains electrolytes and carbohydrates, and not caffeine or other stimulants.
It’s important that you’re hydrated at all hours of the day. If you feel thirsty
before you even start a workout, it most likely means you’re dehydrated so
it’s important to continuously monitor fluid intake.
During Swimming
If your workout lasts longer than 60 minutes, it’s important to consume
some carbohydrates. This can be done through a sports drink or gel and
ensures that your muscles receive adequate amounts of energy, especially
during the later stages of a competition or a workout.
Consume 6-12 ounces of a sports drink with 6-8% carbohydrates every

--- Page 108 Text ---
15-30 minutes during your swim workout. Just for reference, one gulp is
about two ounces, so about three to six gulps every half hour. Your sports
drink needs to contain enough water to avoid cramps.
For high intensity activities, sports drinks and gels containing multiple
forms of sugar can increase absorption and delivery of carbohydrates. If
you’re swimming less than 60 minutes, simply drinking water will be more
than enough to keep you hydrated.
It’s important to note that sports drinks should not be confused with
“energy drinks,” which typically contain stimulants. Additionally their
carbohydrate concentration is normally greater than 10%. Sports drinks are
beverages that contain electrolytes and carbohydrates, not caffeine and other
stimulants, for example Gatorade or Powerade.
After Swimming
It’s key to eat a carbohydrate snack within 30 minutes after a swim
workout to allow the body to start replenishing glycogen stores in the body.
Even if you can’t eat a full meal immediately after the swim, it’s important to
at least have 0.65 grams of carbohydrates per pound of body weight within
the first 30 minutes after exercise.
I always recommend a banana and bagel if you can bring that with you.
The average banana has 31 grams of carbs, and a bagel has 52 grams of
carbs. This “post workout snack” should be followed by an additional “full
meal” within two hours of completing the swim workout. It’s important to
consume a couple of meals high in carbohydrates within six hours after
swimming to ensure that the muscles continue the glycogen restoration.
In terms of hydration, drink three cups of fluid for each pound lost during
the workout. In the water, it’s hard to tell how much “water weight” you’ve
lost. A common myth is that swimmers do not sweat in the water. This is
false, and swimmers do sweat in the pool. It’s important to hydrate yourself
before, during, and after a workout!
Hydration
Hydration is one of the most important nutritional components for a
swimmer of any level. Over 60% of your body is water and as you train, fluid
is lost through your skin through sweat and through the lungs while
breathing. If this fluid is not replaced at regular intervals during a workout, it

--- Page 109 Text ---
will lead to dehydration.
If you become dehydrated, you will have a decreased volume of blood
circulating through your body and consequently the amount of blood pumped
with each heartbeat decreases. Additionally, the muscles that you’re engaging
will not receive enough oxygen. As a result, exhaustion sets in, and your
performance will suffer.
The best way to prevent dehydration is to maintain your body’s fluid
levels by consuming floods before, during, and after your swim workout.
You can monitor your fluid loss in two ways. The first is simply weighing
yourself before and after a workout. Remember, for every pound lost during
the workout, drink three cups of fluids to rehydrate your body.
Another way you can monitor your hydration level is by monitoring the
color of your urine. Urine that is dark gold indicates dehydration. If your
urine is pale lemonade or weak tea color, it’s a sign that you’re hydrated.
Most people don’t feel thirsty until more than 2 percent of your body
weight is lost. By this point, it’s too late, and you’ve already become
dehydrated. For best results, keep a bottle of fluid available with you and
drink every 15-20 minutes while you workout!
Supplements
If you’re looking for a competitive edge or something just to help you
reach your fitness goals, supplements may be something to consider.
However, there are no quick-fix supplements for improving sports
performance. Consuming a wide variety of foods and staying well hydrated
are the basic ingredients to reaching peak performance.
If you’re competing and subject to drug testing, you must tread carefully
because dietary supplements may cause a positive test for a prohibited
substance that may not be disclosed on the product label. Some dietary
supplements include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, herbs, and other
organic tissues and metabolites.
While some mainstream supplements are made by responsible
manufacturers, a growing number of supplement products contain dangerous
and undisclosed ingredients like steroids, stimulants, and other drugs. Rather
than relying on advertisements from companies who are trying to sell you
their product, you as a consumer have the responsibility to educate yourself
on what you’re putting into your body.
While there is no such thing as a magic diet or food, there are many ways

--- Page 110 Text ---
in which eating well will allow you to achieve your specific goals. It makes
no sense to train hard and ignore the benefits that good food choices offer to
maximize training and performance. Remember, you are what you eat!

--- Page 111 Text ---
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Mental Training
I’ you to think about the last time you tried a new hobby, sport, or
D LIKE
fitness-related skill. Maybe it was learning how to ski, or think about the very
first time you learned a new technique in the pool. Was it easy? Did you
struggle at it?
Did that struggle give you a boost of motivation, or did it make you feel
hopeless?
If you respond to these challenges in life with a renewed sense of
motivation, you most likely have a growth mindset. If you feel helpless and
discouraged, you probably fall in with the majority of people who have more
of a fixed mindset.
The good news is that you can actually change this limiting mindset. And
when you do, you’ll open up a whole new world of possibilities and make
more progress on your swimming journey than you ever before thought
possible!

--- Page 112 Text ---
Growth vs. Fixed Mindset
With a fixed mindset, you generally believe that your skills and abilities
are predetermined. Think about something as basic as learning how to swim.
We all learned this skill at one point. The earlier in our life we learned this
skill, the less we remember it. If you learn how to swim as an adult, your
preconceived notions and fears around the water are significant inhibitors to
just getting started.
This is the same concept for any skill in swimming. A few examples of
these “skills” include learning how to do a flip turn, bilateral breathing,
underwater dolphin kicking, and many, many more. If you have a fixed
mindset, you might think that there is no hope to learn these new skills
because you’re either good at it or you’re not. People with this mindset tend
to believe that there’s not much you can do to change this.
With a growth mindset, you believe that no matter where you’re starting
from, you can improve. If you have a growth mindset around swimming, you
believe you can improve your technique, become more efficient, and swim
faster, no matter where you’re starting from.
People with a growth mindset excel in all facets of life, not just in fitness
and swimming. It’s an important concept to discuss and understand because
by doing so, you will be able to unlock an incredible amount of potential

--- Page 113 Text ---
within yourself.
Hard work, proper goal setting, and perseverance will get you to where
you want to be, but you have to first start by believing that you can get there
regardless of where you are now. If you have a fixed mindset around your
swimming performance, then your underlying belief is that no matter what
you do, you won’t improve.
It’s important to note that having a growth vs. fixed mindset isn’t always
black and white. For example, if you learned how to swim as a child, you
have probably always found that floating or treading water relatively easy.
You’re probably confident that if you want to get better at treading water,
floating, or even swimming, that if provided with clear goals, a good plan,
and the right support system you’ll be able to improve these skills relatively
quickly.
Yet, when it comes to running, you might believe you’re just terrible at it.
You may have been told that swimmers are not good at running and vice
versa. So if you’re good at running, you can’t be good at swimming and if
you’re a fish in the water, you’re not going to be athletic on land.
If you truly believe that you’ll never get better at something, you’re
unlikely to put any necessary time or effort required to actually make
progress. It’s a toxic mindset that only holds you back. If you don’t put in the
effort, you’re not going to improve. It’s pretty simple. This is why mindset is
so critical. Regardless of where you fall on the mindset spectrum right now,
you can change it!
Developing a Growth Mindset
I truly believe that no matter where you’re starting from, you can
improve. Yes, it will be hard work, and it will take time, but it will always be
worth it when you look back at how far you’ve come.
Having a growth mindset is the first step in the process, but it won’t get
you very far if you don’t do any actual work. To really see measurable
progress, you have to work on setting both short- and long-term goals, then
break them down into achievable milestones. In the next section, we’ll go
into detail on how to set SMART goals for yourself to be successful.
If you want to make progress towards a big long-term goal like losing
weight, qualifying for a competition, or even breaking a world record, you
not only have to believe you can get better, you also need to place effort
before talent. For example, it’s easy to look at a swim team practice and see

--- Page 114 Text ---
that a few of the kids naturally seem to swim faster than the rest of the group.
Are these swimmers more coordinated or more physically developed?
Why are they moving faster than the other swimmers? What you can’t see
from this snapshot alone is what will happen with the slower swimmers if
they work harder than their more talented-seeming peers, Most of these
swimmers will actually surpass the other kids at some point. You must
believe that effort is more important than initial talent to have a growth
mindset.
Another key mindset shift is learning to develop the skill of perseverance.
Some call it grit, toughness, or downright hustle. Developing grit means
combining persistence, ambition, and self-discipline to chase big goals that
might take months, years, or even decades to accomplish.
This tenacity is what allows you to stick with your goals when you reach
snags and roadblocks along the way. We all experience failure in some way
or another, and that’s okay. It’s going to happen!
I can accept failure, everyone fails at something, but I can’t accept not
trying. – Michael Jordan
Failure is something we all experience at some point. It’s nothing to be
ashamed of; if anything it should be embraced. Whether it’s missing the wall
on a flip turn, getting disqualified in your best event or flunking an exam at
school, it is something that we all experience, and it’s totally normal and
actually healthy.
Sometimes failure is a reality check to keep us humble and motivated.
Other times, failure just down right sucks. Regardless of how you fail, or
what you fail in, what’s most important is what you do next!
Having a growth mindset is incredibly vulnerable because when you give
yourself a shot to try something you care about, you’re also setting yourself
up for a potential failure. If you don’t allow yourself to fail, you won’t allow
yourself to really try.
The more challenging the goal, the harder you’ll have to work for it. It
doesn’t matter if your goal is to drop 1 second in your 50m freestyle time or
qualify for the Olympic team, it all starts with a growth mindset.
Mental Training

--- Page 115 Text ---
So, how do you develop and train a growth mindset?
Mental factors such as confidence, composure, focus, and motivation are
highly significant to improving your chances of success. In athletics, there’s
an entire industry of sports psychology professionals that are focused on
optimizing an athlete’s mental training to reach peak performance.
This is not just about maximizing athletic output but also minimizing the
psychological effects of poor performance. Psychology principles such as
positive thinking, imagery, and goal setting can be applied to swimming
goals to help you perform and prepare for an individual workout, a season,
and your entire swimming career. At the elite levels, all swimmers have the
talent and the physical tools to compete at an incredibly high level. What
separates these athletes is what happens between the ears. It’s mental
training.
Mental training is the segment of sports psychology that concentrates
specifically on breaking through the mental barriers that are keeping you
from performing at peak potential. Remember, this concept extends beyond
just swimming and makes its way into our daily life. Having a growth
mindset paired with the right mental training allows us to theoretically
achieve whatever we set our minds to.
You can't put a limit on anything. The more you dream, the farther
you get. - Michael Phelps
It’s easier to embrace mental training when you fully understand it and its
benefits. However, the best way to embrace mental training is when you
actually experience its power firsthand. Mental training is about improving
your attitude and mental skills to help perform at your best by identifying
limiting beliefs and embracing a healthier philosophy about the sport.
Mental skills, just like any physical skill, take repetition, practice, and
real-time application to develop! This means working on your mental fitness
on a daily basis. It also means identifying any mental barriers that are holding
you back. Mental barriers include perfectionism, the fear of failure, and a
lack of emotional control.
When I was in high school, our swim coach ran us through a visualization
activity in the weeks leading up to our conference championships meet.
Every day before we got in the water to start the swim portion of our
workout, we laid down on our towels and closed our eyes. Our coach asked

--- Page 116 Text ---
us to simply relax and visualize the “big day”.
He used vivid language to describe the atmosphere of the swimming
competition, the aroma of chlorine on the pool deck, and of course the sights
and sounds of the swimming venue. He spoke in great detail allowing us to
formulate a mental model of our ideal race. From how we were called onto
the starting block, then diving in, approaching the first turn, and finally,
touching the wall and seeing the scoreboard with our goal time.
Visualization is a very powerful skill, and similarly to any physical skill,
it takes time to develop. Mental training is an incredible skill to have in your
tool kit. Remember, the mind controls the body and the mind is unlimited!
Your Mind is a Muscle — Let’s Flex It.
If you want to get physically stronger, you’ll need to workout. This is
pretty simple and obvious for our physical attributes, but it also holds true for
our mental strength. Through training, we can change our brains to become
even more mentally strong, healthier, and fitter.
Think of your mind as a muscle. When I talk about our mind’s strength,
I’m referring to different mental abilities we can access, strengthen, and flex.
This mental strength supports us in feeling creative, resilient, happy, and
successful.
We don’t get strong arms by doing bicep curls only once. Our mental
strength is the same. Improving our mental muscles’ performance requires
time, practice, and consistency. This can be done through a number of ways,
including visualization, which was already mentioned, but also in ways that
do not directly relate to swimming.
Training your mind’s muscle is a lifestyle priority. Oftentimes, this
mental fitness doesn’t actually take that long to develop on a daily basis, you
just need to be consistent. It could be as simple as 10 minutes of morning
meditation, prioritizing sleep, prayer, taking time to reflect everyday, or
connecting with a loved one.
If you notice that some of these activities are overwhelming or trigger
feelings of anxiety, then I recommend reaching out and getting support from
a trusted friend, a therapist, or a health-care practitioner. While it’s helpful to
be independent and self-sufficient in some areas of life, it’s wise to seek
support where you may need help. One of the greatest acts of courage and
developing mental strength is taking the initiative to ask for help.
Slowing down and deepening your breath can help calm the mind. It can

--- Page 117 Text ---
also reduce blood pressure, improve memory, and settle emotions. Meditation
is a great way to practice concentration, equanimity, clarity, and friendliness
with yourself.
Take a moment and reflect, how would you describe yourself when you
are feeling mentally strong, healthy, and fit?
Taking Action
Are you excited by the prospect of swimming?
Are you excited to jump in the water tomorrow? or today? — or would
you rather not think about it at all?
Try writing down your feelings about swimming in a quick, five-minute,
stream-of-consciousness burst. This can help indicate your current train of
thought. It’s perfectly normal to want to put these thoughts off to the side or
just not think about it. Ordinarily, I would agree with you, but since you’re
reading a book on how to improve your swimming, I’ll challenge you
anyway!
At some point, you’ll need to specify your intentions, write SMART
goals, and take action. Many people aim too high, setting unrealistic
expectations (I’m going to swim twice a day every single day!) and
unattainable goals (I’m going to break the world record next month!). But
this approach seldom works, and it can lead to feelings of failure and
hopelessness.
In the next section, we’ll dive into how to set SMART goals so you can
be successful! This all starts with a growth mindset and holistic approach to
training that includes both your physical regimen and also your mental
training. We’ll dig into why you swim and how to get started!

--- Page 118 Text ---
COOL DOWN:
Swim for life

--- Page 120 Text ---
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Why We Swim
S a one of a kind experience, and nothing else will engage
WIMMING IS TRULY
all your senses like the feeling of being in the water. There’s something about
the feeling of weightlessness that is special, and it is this feeling that is one of
the many joys the sport of swimming offers humanity.
There’s a euphoric feeling of being in the water that’s unique. When we
find comfort in this magical medium called water, we feel at home. There are
many reasons to swim, and too many to list here, but it’s important for
yourself to understand WHY you swim. When you understand your “why,”
you’ll be able to better position yourself for success regardless of what your
goals are.
The Golden Circle
If someone asked you how you stay fit, you’d likely reply something
along the lines of “I swim”, I go to the gym”, “I lift weights”, or “I don’t
really workout”. All of these responses are perfectly valid, but they don’t
really spark any emotion.
It’s very easy to understand “what” you do to stay in shape and even
“how” you do it, but it’s often hard to uncover “why” we do what we do. It’s
important to dig deeper into this topic because once we understand the
underlying emotion and drivers of our actions, we are better able to impact
them and achieve a desired outcome.
A famous thought leader and author named Simon Sinek popularized a
concept of a Golden Circle. The model he developed is an attempt to explain
why some people and organizations are particularly able to inspire others and

--- Page 121 Text ---
differentiate themselves successfully. These concepts can easily be applied to
our life goals and swimming ambitions specifically. The neuroscience behind
the Golden Circle theory is that humans respond best when messages
communicate with those parts of the brain that control emotions, behavior,
and decision making.
At the outer core, we think about “what” we do. For the scope of our golden
circle analogy, we’ll focus on swimming. We’ll reference two individuals. A
young man named John who swims three times per week and an older
woman named Susan who goes swimming in the ocean every morning. When
we move from the outer core towards the middle of the Golden Circle, we
enter the next layer: “How.” Now the discussion is not about what you do,
but how you do it.
For example, John who swims three times per week does so by following
a specific training plan in the MySwimPro app. Susan on the other hand goes
open water swimming every morning by meeting a group of friends at 6AM
by Tower 30 and swimming parallel to the shoreline for 2 km. As you can see
with each layer of the golden circle, we get more specific and really start to
understand how John and Susan build a swimming routine.
Most people stop there. They go only two layers deep. At the core of the
Golden Circle is Why. We need to understand why we do what we do. Why
does John swim three times per week and Susan swim in the ocean every
morning?
John swims three times per week because his goal is to lose 5 kilograms

--- OCR from Page 121 Image 1 ---
WHY

Why you do what you do?

SIMON
SINEK
GOLDEN
CIRCLE

What's the purpose?

HOW

How you do what you do?

-WHAT

What do you do?

--- Page 122 Text ---
before his wedding date. He used to be a runner, but due to injuring his knee,
and several operations later, he’s no longer able to run for cardio. John used
to swim on a team growing up, so he picked it back up to increase his cardio
before his wedding date.
Susan, on the other hand, swims in the ocean every morning because
she’s been doing this same routine for the last 30 years. Her morning swim
group has become her family. What started as a fun way to kickoff the day
with friends has become a ritual and meditative escape from the stresses of
the world.
Both John and Susan recognize the incredible health benefits of
swimming, yet their “why” is completely different. John is motivated by
results and has a specific numeric goal he’s working towards. Susan uses
swimming as a mental break from the world and a way to structure her day
and her life. John and Susan both swim, but their how and why are very
different. It’s important to dig into why you do what you do.
Why do you swim?
There really is no right or wrong answer to this question, but it’s
important to take a moment and reflect on why you do what you do. If you
can find where your internal drive comes from, and then associate your goals
to this intrinsic motivation, you’ll be much more successful in reaching your
dreams! You’ll also enjoy the journey of swimming that much more!
Why Swim?
There are many reasons to swim!
Physical fitness is a given, but there’s so much more than just being fit
and having a certain physique. Of course, there’s the mental health element of
swimming which is huge. It’s pretty remarkable to be in an environment
where you can escape from the world. Add in the zero gravity effect of water,
and it’s as if you’ve teleported to outer space!
Many swim because they’ve found routine in the daily dip before or after
the work day. Adding structure to your day or week can make you more
productive in all areas of your life. I personally know many people who swim
because it’s all they know, and they’re perfectly fine sticking with it! They
feel no need to pick up another form of fitness. Swimming works for them,
and they have no intention to change it.

--- Page 123 Text ---
On the flip side, there are many people who swim because they can no
longer do another form of fitness due to injury or other restrictions, and now
they rely on the water. Swimming is also great for cross training and
rehabilitation from injury. Many top athletes from other sports use the pool to
add an element of resistance training that can’t be done on land.
For others, swimming is a competitive pursuit. It’s all about being the
best version of yourself in the water, optimizing your technique and training
to reach a specific, measurable goal. Qualifying for a meet or performing a
best time in a specific event becomes the core focus of your swimming. For
me, I sometimes fall into this category when I have something specific to
train for. I love preparing for a pool competition or open water race that
allows me to focus my training and push my body to its limits.
A segment of this competitive group also loves adventure. The world is
filled with beauty, and many swimmers take advantage of unique events and
open water races all over the planet to explore the world. Later in this book, I
outline some of these experiences including the opportunity to swim from
Asia to Europe in the Bosphorus Cross Continental swim. It’s an incredible
experience and there are many venture seekers who simply swim to continue
participating in these incredible events.
I have many friends who love the camaraderie of swimming in a group
workout setting. They prefer going to a pool that’s filled with people. Saying
hello to the lifeguards, pool staff, and if they swim on a team, enjoying the
social element of the sport. Certainly swimming can be a solitary activity, but
there are opportunities to enjoy each other’s company before the workout
gets started, between sets, and after a workout. It’s also fantastic to have other
swimmers to push you to be your best in the middle of difficult training
sessions.
Finally, there’s an element of intrigue about swimming that’s hard to put
my finger on. It’s truly a unique experience that’s unlike anything else. Take
an opportunity and really think about why you swim. Why do you do what
you do? Understanding why you swim will help you structure your goals,
training plan, and time in the water to enjoy the sport to its full potential!

--- Page 124 Text ---
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
How To Get Started
I , I’m going to share a simple process for how you can turn
N THIS CHAPTER
your why into a specific action plan to reach your goals. This might be the
most important chapter you’ll ever read if you have not gotten started yet OR
if you have never set SMART goals before. I’ll break down exactly what
SMART goals are, how to to write them, and how to get started.
If you have not already done so, please checkout the supplemental online
course for exclusive video content and document templates that matchup with
each chapter of this book. Also, be sure to join the MySwimPro global
community facebook group. This is 100% free and accessible to swimmers
who have purchased this book. This group and all other digital resources will
be linked in the supplemental online course.
SMART Goals
Swimmers in general are very ambitious people, but oftentimes, we’ll bite
off more than we can chew. A resolution without a plan is just wishful
thinking, so it’s super important to set SMART Goals for yourself.
If you want long-term success, be clear about what you want to
accomplish. Recall your why. When setting goals, it’s crucial that they be
very defined and methodical in your approach. To help you succeed, use the
S.M.A.R.T. goal process. SMART is an acronym for the five building blocks
necessary to reach any goal.
S – Specific
M – Measurable

--- Page 125 Text ---
A – Achievable
R – Relevant
T – Time-Bound
Make sure your goals are specific and stated in performance terms. For
instance, if you want to drop time, your goal might be “to drop 2.00 seconds
in the 200 meter freestyle at the regional championships in 12 weeks.” If you
want to improve your flip turn, your goal might be “to swim 500 meters
continuously with flip turns at every turn by the end of the year.”
A goal is measurable when it is easy to determine if it was accomplished.
In swimming, dropping time is easily measured. In the prior example, 12
weeks from now you will either drop 2 seconds or not in the 200 meter
freestyle. Likewise, for the flip turn goal, it will be easy to determine if you
are successful in accomplishing that goal because there was a metric
associated to it: swim 500 meters with a flip turn at every turn.
Conversely, a goal to “swim faster” is not very measurable. A better goal
is to swim a specific distance in a specific period of time. Your goal does not
have to be doing a best time to be measurable. Maybe your goal is to lose
weight. Great, how much weight? Perhaps your goal is more technique
oriented and you’d like to swim more efficiently. A great goal for efficiency
is swimming with an average distance per stroke, stroke count, or SWOLF.
The key is to add a metric so you can measure your progress towards a
specific goal.
One of the biggest mistakes people make while setting goals is that they
set something unattainable. Goals should be set high, but they must also be
realistic. A goal to drop 20 seconds in four weeks in the 100 meter freestyle
is both unrealistic and unhealthy. Likewise, if you are new to swimming and
you set a goal to finish a 5k open water swim in one month, you’re setting
yourself up for failure, pain, and disappointment. Make your goals
challenging but also attainable.
Additionally, your goals should be important to you. They must be
relevant! Don’t follow a goal just because your friends, family members, or
teammates have set that goal on your behalf. Your goals are your motivators
to continue exercising, so make sure they are important to you. Remember
why you swim, and set your goals accordingly.
Make sure each goal has a specific time frame for completion. SMART
goals need to be Time-bound. This allows you to easily determine if the goal

--- Page 126 Text ---
has been achieved on a specific date. It also increases the likelihood that you
will accomplish each goal since you know the clock is ticking. For example,
the goal “to drop 2.00 seconds at the regional championships in 12 weeks”
has a time frame.
Whether it’s 12 weeks from your start date or on a specific day, it’s
important to set a goal with a timeline in the next few months. Any longer
than this, and it becomes a macro goal which you’ll need several micro goals
or “checkpoints” along the way to keep you on track. I advise having both
yearly goals and quarterly goals to keep yourself accountable in the short run
while you work your way to the year-end or seasonal goal.
Avoid fluffy goals at all costs! A fluffy goal is something that does not
meet any of the criteria listed in the SMART goal methodology. This would
be saying something like: I want to swim faster. That’s not a goal, it’s a wish.
Unfortunately, wishful thinking doesn’t make goals happen.
“A dream without a goal is a wish. A goal without a plan is just a
dream.” - Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Another common fluffy goal I see over and over is the notion around
losing weight. “I want to lose weight” is not a goal. It’s great to have the
initial drive to make that statement, but you can’t stop there. Let’s put
together a plan and re-write that wish so it becomes a SMART Goal.
A SMART Goal for weight loss might be something like: “My goal is to
lose 10 kilograms by July 31st. I will do this by swimming three times per
week for 30-45 minutes following the weight loss swim plan in the
MySwimPro app. I will meal prep twice per week and weight myself once
per week and check in with my best friend who is also following the same
weight loss program.”
This goal is brilliant. It’s specific, measurable, attainable, and time-
bound. It’s also relevant to the goal of the swimmer, and it is routed with
intrinsic motivation. This is key and would be further amplified by
understanding why this individual is trying to lose weight. Remember the
Golden Circle: it’s easy to understand the outer shell, but if we can dig deeper
into the underlying motivations, we can be significantly more successful in
achieving our goals.

--- Page 127 Text ---
Make SMARTER Goals
SMART is a fantastic acronym, but there’s something missing from this
formula. A more complete formula adds an important final step: “Re-
Evaluate”. A SMARTER goal means there’s a feedback loop to re-evaluate
and redo the goal as needed. Goals can change, so establish clarity around
success and failure. The final thing to remember when it comes to achieving
large goals is to actually jump in and get started.
This is why breaking your goals into rituals and process goals is so
important. As human beings, we’re wired to avoid disappointment. If your
goals feel unachievable, you’ll start to self sabotage. Don’t work against your
brain. Embrace these limitations and work with smaller, more manageable
goals and rituals.
You can turn simple behaviors into rituals with process goals. Process
goals focus on the implementation of your swimming program. For example,
a good process goal is swimming four times per week for 60 minutes. On the
flip side, thinking that you’re going to go swimming whenever you can or
whenever you feel like it just won't cut it. You have more control over
accomplishing a goal when there is a set schedule around it. This will also
help you get in the habit of swimming with a regular routine to achieve your
goal.
Other process goals as they relate to swimming could include:
Take at least three dolphin kicks off every wall in every workout
Log and keep track of all your workouts in the MySwimPro app
Complete two dryland sessions per week in addition to swimming
Breaststroke pullout past 10m off every wall
No breathing off of a flip turn
Swim an additional 200 meters of breaststroke after every swim
It’s also important to determine roadblocks that may keep you from
reaching your goals and make a plan to get around them. Don’t chase other
people’s goals; set your own goals for yourself. Make sure you’re passionate
about your own goal. Write out your SMART goals. Yes, with a sheet of
paper and a pen. Get it documented and all the steps you need to get there, to
hold yourself accountable. Anticipate set-backs but don’t get discouraged if
you get off track. Instead, focus on the end goal.
Finally, don’t set goals that someone else has power over. Make sure all

--- Page 128 Text ---
your goals are at your own control. No one can control your outcome. This
puts you in a position of both power and self-accountability. Also, be sure to
approach writing SMARTER goals with a positive attitude. Remember, you
want to be ambitious but also realistic. The mind controls the body and the
mind is unlimited!
Finding a Personalized Plan
Understanding your why will help you choose a specific goal and stick
with it. To reach your full potential and optimize your time, you’ll need the
right plan to help you get there. The hardest part is making a commitment to
following a plan and actually getting started. Once you do get started, then
what?
“The secret of getting ahead is getting started.” – Mark Twain
Following a structured plan that is aligned with your goals is the best way
to succeed! Properly designed training plans help you progress safely,
avoiding injury, and building long-term results. In the online supplemental
course, I share a swim workout template and also how to construct a training
plan from scratch.

--- Page 129 Text ---
The MySwimPro App
I started MySwimPro to help swimmers improve their performance and
health. The app essentially works as a personal swim coach wherever and
whenever you need them. By dynamically adapting workouts and training
programs, it offers a personal workout experience as if you had a personal
swim coach guiding you through workouts set by set.
Over the years, the platform has developed to include various wearable
integrations, analytics, video content, and more. We continue to evolve the
platform and deliver an even more personalized training experience for
swimmers around the world regardless of skill level. In the online
supplemental course, I share more about the app, how to use it, and an
exclusive discount to our premium subscription membership.
Additionally, be sure to join the MySwimPro global community
Facebook group. You’ll join tens of thousands of swimmers from all over the
world, from beginner to pro, who are all passionate about swimming faster

--- OCR from Page 129 Image 1 ---
Couch To 1K

© Start Your Plan

Training Plans»

Personalized calendar of
workouts from your
Coach

Workout
Library

‘Choose a single workout

WARM UP af @ Apple
NA App Of The Year

) 2016

Cl fo
was

Cross-Body Jacks |

Wr

L)

Supine Wall Press

UPPER BODY

--- Page 130 Text ---
and smarter than ever before. So whether you’re a beginner swimmer or elite
athlete, you’ve come to the right place!
Having a support network is huge to not only keep you accountable but
also inspire you to do your best and reach for your dreams. You can connect
with me in that group, and a few other resources I’ll list in the online
supplemental course. Wishing you the very best in your journey, and happy
swimming :)!

--- Page 131 Text ---
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
My Gold Medal Moments
I that we are all just one step away from achieving our Gold Medal
BELIEVE
Moment. We just need the right guidance, structure, and support to make it
happen.
At the start of the book, I shared my five promises and the intentions
behind them. The first promise was to share a fresh perspective with you on
swimming in general. How I can present thought-provoking information that
will make you think critically about your swimming. I also wanted to inform
you through a technical breakdown of each stroke and how to swim faster
with a holistic approach.
One of the promises was to help you learn how to set SMART goals,
remembering that a dream without a goal is a wish, and a goal without a plan
is just a dream. We all have our own unique motivations to swim and you
might be curious to learn a bit more about myself and my swimming journey.
What are some of my greatest passions around the water?
That brings us to my final promise of the book, to inspire you! You don’t
have to win gold to achieve something great!
In this last chapter, I’ll share five personal stories from my swimming
story. In the supplemental videos online, you can watch me do video
interviews with incredible human beings. You will hear from people just like
yourself who are working towards their personal goals and finding success.
From losing 100lbs to breaking world records, you will be inspired.
I can’t promise you’ll break a world record or hit a new PR, but with the
resources presented in this book and online course content, you’ll be well on
your way to swimming with more efficiency and greater confidence in the
water.

--- Page 132 Text ---
I Swam Everyday for 30 Days
For one month, I challenged myself to swim every single day! No matter
how tired I felt, or what my schedule looked like, I committed to swimming
over 100,000 meters in just 30 days!
After 30 days of swimming, I successfully swam over 110,000 meters and
raised thousands of dollars for the Movember Foundation. It was incredible
to accomplish this goal, and it felt even sweeter because I had failed to do so
the year prior. You see, I tried to swim 100,000 meters just 12 months earlier
and fell short.
Failure is something we all experience at some point. It’s nothing to be
ashamed of. If anything, it should be embraced. Regardless of how you fail,
or what you fail in, what’s most important is what you do next! Success is not
final; failure is not fatal. It’s the courage to continue that counts.
In the following year of that failure, with a renewed motivation to hit
100,000 meters, I made a plan! I would swim every single day. No excuses! I
needed to average at least 4,000 yards per day! That’s about 3.5 kilometers or
2.2 Miles. Some days, I swam twice, changing up my workouts for variety’s
sake and to reduce the stress on my body.
Rather than swim continuously for 4,000 yards every session, I broke it
up. I wrote out my workouts the day before using the MySwimPro app and
loaded the workout onto my watch at the pool before each session! I followed
a structured workout routine to stay on track and keep myself accountable to
swimming the full distance.
I’ve never appreciated having a coach on my wrist as much as I did
during this challenge because some days I really wanted to get out of the
water early, but I had my coach pushing me to complete the next set!
Swimming every single day was a new experience for me! Normally, I swim
three times per week and mix in a dryland routine three or four times per
week out of the water.
Even in college, we would only swim six days per week and have one day
off to recover. So this challenge was definitely uncharted waters. Pun
intended! You might be wondering what happens to your body when you
swim every day with no days off!
Do you grow gills? Do your arms fall off?
While I didn’t grow any gills (at least that I know of), I did develop an
incredible feel of the water. The more time you spend in the water, the more
refined this feel becomes. As soon as you stop swimming, you start to lose

--- Page 133 Text ---
this feel of the water. And, the longer you’re away from the water, the longer
it will take for you to get that feel back.
Because I was swimming every day and averaged less than 24 hours
between every swim, I felt an incredible connection to the water by the end of
the month. Beyond feeling stronger in the water, I also experienced tons of
health benefits. During these 30 days, my vital lung capacity improved, my
average resting heart rate dropped, and I also got faster!
My average swimming pace dropped about 10% by the end of the month.
I would find myself swimming freestyle with paddles at 1:10 pace per 100
yards easily. I could probably hold that pace for a few thousand yards
continuously if I needed to. I was able to swim faster with less energy just by
improving my feel of the water and developing a more robust aerobic
capacity.
The endorphins were an added bonus, too. I always left the pool with a
smile on my face! If you have not experienced the joy of swimming every
day, I highly recommend it. Even if it’s just for a week. The beauty of
swimming is that you can do it at any age, unlike other sports that are high
impact.
Swimming every day helped me develop a routine, disconnect from the
daily grind, and build my character and mental confidence. But it also helped
me make an impact on the world around me. As part of my challenge, I raised
over a thousand dollars for the Movember foundation to support those men
tackling prostate cancer, testicular cancer, mental health challenges, and
suicide.
I shared my progress nearly every day with the MySwimPro community
in our Facebook group and in the MySwimPro app. The community
supported me and pushed me to reaching this goal. I also shared my progress
on my personal social media accounts (@FaresKsebati), and I saw amazing
support there as well.
When I first tried to swim 100,000 meters in 30 days, I failed. The
following year, I learned from that experience, made the necessary changes,
and I finally did it. Remember, whenever you think you’ve failed, reframe it
as an opportunity to learn, grow and do better next time.
How I Swam From Asia to Europe

--- Page 135 Text ---
The Bosphorus is a narrow, natural straight that separates the continents
of Asia and Europe!
It stretches 30 Kilometers and unites the Black Sea with the Sea of
Marmara. The Bosphorus is the lifeblood of Istanbul, and every year for the
last three decades, thousands of swimmers from around the world travel to
Turkey to swim from one continent to the other. I successfully completed this
exhilarating open water race in 2019 and thrilled to share what that
experience was like!
The Bosphorus is one of the busiest waterways in the world, due to its
strategic importance connecting The East and West. The city of Istanbul is
home to over 15 Million residents and has been the capital city of three
empires: Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman! The city, which was called Second
Rome and New Rome at the beginning of the Modern Age, was later called
"Byzantium" and Constantinople in later periods. These empires each left
their incredible landmarks on the city’s skyline.
Swimming in the Bosphorus, you can see countless palaces, mosques,
churches, and monuments that mark Istanbul’s rich history and culture. Every
year, 2.5 thousand swimmers from around the world travel to Istanbul to
compete in the annual Cross Continental Swim.
The race covers 6.5 kilometers of the Bosphorus in the heart of Istanbul.
On the morning of the race, the straight completely shuts down for three
hours. Just enough time to clear all the ferries, yachts, and ships for the
moment I had anticipated for months. Tens of thousands of spectators line the
Bosphorus on both the Asian and European sides to see a truly spectacular
sight.
No where else will you see one of the busiest shipping channels in the
world shut down so swimmers can race across it. The backdrop of Istanbul’s
magnificent Mosques, castles, and rich history adds a unique flavor to this
one-of-a-kind spectacle.
All of the swimmers load onto two massive ships on the European side
before being transported to the starting dock in Asia. Onboard the ship, you
can feel everyone’s energy and excitement. Once we leave the dock, there’s
no turning back! We wear nothing but our swimsuits, goggles, caps, and
tracking bracelets.
The ships are divided by age-group, and after a 15-minute cruise up the
Bosphorus, we dock at the starting point. A starting platform is built in a
matter of minutes. It’s almost time for the race to begin! The anticipation is

--- Page 136 Text ---
growing. Everyone on the boat is ready to go. The water is calm, but not for
long. The event staff gives the final ok, then the gun goes off!
The first wave of swimmers dives into the vibrant, blue waters of the
Bosphorus. The older swimmers began their journey back to Europe first
while I waited patiently alongside 1,200 other swimmers. Within the first 30
seconds, over 500 swimmers have already started racing. I don’t recall being
nervous, I was more excited than anything.
What was once a vision of swimming between two continents was about
to become a reality. In times like these, all your senses are firing. After a few
minutes, most of the swimmers had entered the water, and finally, it was my
turn to take the plunge. I walked to the edge of the starting platform, looked
out at the nearly two thousand swimmers scattered across the Bosphorus, and
dove in!
From afar, we looked like thousands of piranhas nipping at the surface. I
felt strong, the water was cool, and I knew my sense of direction. Within a
couple of minutes, I passed under the first bridge. The Fatih Sultan Mehmet
bridge carries over 150,000 cars between Asia and Europe every day. I could
barely believe I was swimming underneath it, and I couldn’t help but swim a
few strokes of backstroke to gaze up at this 8-lane suspension bridge. One of
the largest in the world.
Moving past the first bridge, it became clear where the current was
strongest. Veterans of this swim advise following the cool water flowing
from the Black sea for the fastest swim. If you can catch the cold water,
usually right in the middle of the straight, you’ll be able to swim nearly twice
as fast! If you miss the current and swim off to the side, you may get sucked
into a negative draft on the shoreline and go practically nowhere. Sure
enough, I found what I thought was the cold current and got into rhythm.
I felt strong, and the view was magnificent. The sight of Istanbul’s
architecture from the middle of the Bosphorus was something out of an epic
film. Every breath I took gave me a new perspective of the horizon. Although
I was one of the last swimmers to leave the starting platform, I wasn’t
concerned because I knew the final race time was based on my timing chip
and not when the first swimmer entered the water.
I used this to my advantage, and over the next 30 minutes proceeded to
pass approximately two thousand swimmers by the time I reached the second
bridge near the finish. As I approached the finish, the current intensified. It
was so strong, I felt like I was flying. I’ve never experienced anything like it.

--- Page 137 Text ---
The current is so powerful, in fact, that a series of safety boats position
themselves just past the finishing platform to catch swimmers who get swept
past the finish line. This happens to a couple dozen swimmers every year, and
knowing this, I made sure to position myself accordingly for a strong finish.
As I neared the platform, I could see and hear thousands of spectators
from the bleachers and shoreline. There were drones, helicopters, and fans at
the park cheering for all of us to finish. I took my final few strokes into the
platform, and climbed out.
I did it!
I swam from Asia to Europe! I was a cross continental swimmer, and it
was an amazing experience. I placed third in my age group with a final time
of 53 minutes and 36 seconds, and I was the fastest swimmer from the United
States across all age-groups. I averaged 48 seconds per 100 meters. For
context, the world record in the 100-meter freestyle is 46 seconds (set in a
pool), meaning I swam at nearly world record pace for almost an hour.
This isn’t to say how fast I am, but it’s a testament to how strong the
water’s current is in the Bosphorus. Most swimmers take anywhere from 60
to 90 minutes to complete the swim. The record time for this swim was set in
2006 at 39 minutes, or 36 seconds per 100 meters.

--- Page 139 Text ---
The race is followed by a televised awards ceremony hosted by members
of the local government. Family and friends gather to watch and congratulate
each other on completing the cross continental swim! If you’re considering
this race, I highly recommend it! It’s absolutely incredible.
The swim is well-organized, the views are magnificent, and the city of
Istanbul is amazing! With international participants from over 50 countries,
many travelers, including myself, take the opportunity to explore the
beautiful city of Istanbul before and after the race.
Istanbul is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the world, with
a mesmerizing culture, delicious food, and a breathtaking skyline. I spent the
week after the race exploring the city with my parents, and it was truly a once
in a lifetime experience.
Thank you for joining me on this journey swimming from Asia to Europe.
A video version of this short story is available to view in the online course
material, so be sure to check it out and get the popcorn ready!
My First Triathlon

--- Page 141 Text ---
I was first introduced to the sport of triathlon when I watched the 2000
Olympic Games in Sydney, Australia. I was intrigued by how much training
it took for these athletes to be highly competitive at three different sports. I
remember watching highlight reels that showed how these athletes were
training up to eight hours per day in pursuit of their Olympic dream!
At the time, I was in elementary school and could barely handle being in
school for eight hours so the thought of doing anything like that seemed
crazy. Little did I know that less than two decades later I would not only
participate in triathlon but also coach triathletes. I even took it to another
level and got certified as a USA Triathlon coach!
Over the last decade or so, I’ve had the unique opportunity to meet with
hundreds if not thousands of triathletes. What I find the most fascinating is
just how different everyone’s background is coming into the sport. Some
triathletes have never competed in anything their entire life, while others are
former collegiate athletes. While the sport does attract a more competitive,
Type-A personality, I personally know dozens of people who ascended to
multiple Ironman’s from very humble beginnings.
This is what I found most inspiring about the sport of triathlon. Similar to
swimming, where you really don’t need much background to get started, I
found that triathlon offered a similar path to improvement. If you are
consistent, seek out the right information, and work hard, you’ll see initial
progress almost right away.
I didn’t really understand this until I finished swimming in college and
moved onto the “real world” post university. It wasn’t until I started coaching
masters swimming that I started to truly realize just how different the
motivations and goals triathletes had compared to fitness swimmers.
What I realized is that the triathletes I was working with had very little
swimming or training knowledge. They were already training anywhere from
10-15 hours per week outside of the water and highly engaged with their
workout regime. They came to me, their coach, often with fear, anxiety, and
confusion around how to actually prepare for the swimming portion of a
triathlon.
I did my best to research the specific differences between training for
pool swimming and preparing for an open water race. I looked deeper into
the differences between open water swimming and the first leg of a triathlon
from a technique perspective. I also learned how the best athletes conserve
energy during the swim portion of the race as well as the mental element of

--- Page 142 Text ---
preparing for longer half-ironman and full ironman triathlon distances.
After weeks and months of working with triathletes on their specific
goals, we were making progress, but I still felt like something was missing.
Despite having a strong foundation in both pool and open water swimming, I
felt compelled to actually experience a triathlon for myself. I was motivated
to sign up for a race for a number of reasons.
Firstly, I had never done a triathlon and it seemed like something to
experience for myself. Secondly, I was watching so many videos and reading
numerous articles that I figured I must know enough to make this happen.
Finally, I was surrounded by people who were preparing for specific races,
and I wanted to fully experience this with them and see what it’s like for
myself.
In April, I signed up for a Sprint triathlon on Belle Isle, a beautiful island
that sits in the middle of the Detroit River between the United States and
Canada. The race was in June, and I knew that I was “in shape” enough to
participate but wasn’t sure just how taxing each of the three disciplines would
be on my body. This sprint triathlon consisted of a 500 meter swim, 20 km
bike ride, and finished with a 5km run.
At the time, I was fresh off my college swimming days and the thought of
swimming 500 meters in open water seemed more like a warmup than an
actual endurance race. For about two months, I picked up my weekly cycling
distance and added running to my weight lifting routine out of the water. I
felt aerobically fit and ready to take on my first sprint triathlon.
Looking back now, I find it comical how I arrived at the event on race
morning. At the time, I was living in an apartment in downtown Detroit, and I
didn’t have a bike rack on my car or any way to get to the island with my
bike. I figured it’d be easier to just ride my bike to the race course and figure
it out when I arrive. This was my first mistake and what I learned to be a
major component of these types of races.
Preparation is crucial, and it has more to do than just training. Your gear
setup, nutrition, race plan, and execution all need to be rehearsed ahead of
time. I’m someone who can think on their feet and doesn’t get anxious very
easily. I learned that this is a false sense of confidence that doesn't shield you
from being fully mentally and physically prepared for an event like this.
I arrived to the transition area exhausted after biking 7km from my
apartment with my race bag stuffed with my wetsuit, water bottles, snacks,
and clothes. 7km felt like a lot more than it needed to ride on the pothole

--- Page 143 Text ---
filled roads of Detroit with 10kg on my back at 6am. Regardless of how tired
my legs were, I was not phased. I had no benchmark to compare myself to
and was there to have fun and take in the full experience.
Luckily, the weather was fantastic, and it was all sunny skies, and smiles
all around on the beach before the water race started. I was surprised and
happy to see so many familiar faces on the beach. I was pumped to get started
and patiently awaited my heat to be called into the water.
The water temperature was a crisp 18° Celsius (about 65° Fahrenheit) and
felt pretty calm with my wetsuit on. When the horn sounded, we were off. I
immediately remember just how fast everyone was swimming. I arrogantly
thought I would be body lengths ahead of everyone within the first 50 to 100
meters. I was dead wrong!
If I could guess the split time of my first 50 meters, it would probably be
less than 35 seconds. Despite this early speed, I was sandwiched between at
least five or six other guys up until around 100-150 meters. I started to
separate myself from the field just slightly, and as I imagined, I finished the
swimming portion ahead of all the other participants.
At that moment, I thought I had conserved a lot of my energy on the
swim. I felt strong with my technique and confident knowing I had just
crushed the entire field in my first ever triathlon race. Boy was I wrong. Dead
wrong!
Unfortunately, I was comparing that specific effort level to how much
effort I exert in a sprint race in the pool. The first leg of a triathlon is
completely different than racing a 100 meter breaststroke. In the pool, the
goal is to expend 100% of your effort over the course of the race. In open
water, and specifically in triathlon, I learned that even just swimming “easy”
is not easy enough.
When I exited the water and ran over to the transition area, I felt calm and
collected. I was still in the lead leaving T1 and then started the bike course.
Two laps around the island equaled 20 km. Let’s go!
As you can imagine, it wasn’t long before all the other athletes in my heat
started passing me on the bike course. It must have been less than two
minutes before I was eventually passed by a dozen or so other athletes from
my heat. My goal was never to win anything or care about my time in this
race, but the adrenaline of the moment will always push you harder.
I tried to hold a strong pace on the bike, but I had put too much energy
into the swim and my legs started to feel heavy. On top of that, I’m probably

--- Page 144 Text ---
the weakest on the bike of all three disciplines. After about 10 minutes, I
settled into my groove and just acknowledged the fact that I would be passed
by biker after biker.
The other athletes sounded like bees zipping by every time they passed
me, so I just tried to stay out of their way. It felt like driving on the freeway
going the speed limit and everyone is dodging you going 15-20 kph over the
limit. I just kept my course and did my thing.
When I got off the bike just before entering T2, my legs were completely
jello. I had practiced a few brick workouts, where I would combine a bike,
then go for a short run afterwards immediately after, but this feeling was
something else entirely. I started the final leg of the race with a slow jogging
pace, and was eventually able to finish the 5k run in about 24 minutes. I was
relatively happy with that split because I had trained to hold that pace in the
weeks leading up to the race.
When I crossed the finish line, I was so relieved. My body felt destroyed
and excited at the same time. I was pumped to have accomplished something
new, and I was grateful to be in the physical health to take something like this
on. It was definitely a learning experience that I used as a launchpad to not
only do more triathlon races in the future but also apply all these experiences
to the athletes I coach.
Just like swimming, triathlon teaches you about perseverance,
consistency, and work ethic. You don’t have to take on Kona to be a triathlete
just like you don’t have to swim the English Channel to be a swimmer.
What’s most important is that you enjoy the experience.
Starting MySwimPro, Inc.
I learned how to swim when I was 5 years old. This was a privilege that
my siblings and I had growing up in a waterfront community where it was the
norm to learn how to swim at a young age. Surprisingly enough, my parents
did not have this opportunity to learn how to swim growing up and were not
confident in the water.
Swimming is a life skill, and this is how the sport starts for many who are
lucky enough to learn how to swim at a young age. Most of my childhood
friends learned how to swim in group lessons or private instruction. I
completed all of the summer swim lessons, and I recall my mom saying
“there was nothing left to sign you up for except for the swim team!”
Sure enough, my older brother and I joined the swim team, and we were

--- Page 145 Text ---
terrible. I was 8 years old in my first summer league swim season, and while
I don’t remember very much about it, I knew I looked forward to going to the
local park everyday to swim outside under the sun.
Fast forward about a decade, and I quickly became one of the best
swimmers in the summer league but was still amazed at just how fast some of
the other swimmers could swim. They made it look so easy, and I soon
learned that these swimmers were training year-round at local USA club
teams.
Growing up through the summer league, I became intrigued at how to
optimize my own performance and learn from the faster swimmers. I went
through high school and college with this self-coaching mindset.
When I was 17, it was an easy transition from swimmer to coach, because
I was always looking at the sport through that lens. It wasn’t until I finished
college swimming and started coaching masters swimming that I realized
how broken the adult fitness swimming model was.
It became clear that most adult fitness swimmers had almost zero
swimming knowledge. A decent handful learned how to swim in a structured
environment like I did, and a few even swam on a swim team growing up, but
the vast majority were completely lost when it came to writing workouts or
coming up with a plan to achieve a specific goal.
This is where the idea for MySwimPro was born. How could I merge my
coaching knowledge with my entrepreneurial intuition? In addition to
coaching swimming, I was working for a venture-backed technology startup
in downtown Detroit. Prior to that, I had worked at several other high growth
early stage companies and dabbled with projects on the side as well.
I’ve always been very entrepreneurial, but never thought I would build a
company related to swimming. That is, until one day a swimmer in my
masters group specifically asked me for a training program to follow while
she traveled out of town for work. It seemed easy enough, but when she
offered to pay me for the plan, a few more wheels started turning.
While I’d love to say this was the singular lightbulb moment for
launching MySwimPro, that wouldn't give appropriate credit to the numerous
other “a-ha” moments I had that year. It was 2014, and the boom of personal
fitness apps was just beginning. Several apps like MyFitnessPal, MapMyRun,
and Strava were starting to gain significant traction, yet there was no app for
swimmers.
After more research, speaking with adult fitness swimmers, and

--- Page 146 Text ---
acknowledging my unique understanding of the market, I decided to take
action and make something happen! I wanted to validate that this was an idea
worthy of pursuing, so I put together a mockup of what the app might look
like, and purchased the domain MySwimPal.com.
Many people don’t know this, but the initial idea for MySwimPro was
MySwimPal. I set up a twitter account (@MySwimPal) and started sending
traffic to the url to get people to put in their email to download an app that
did not yet exist. After a few weeks, I had over 200 emails entered, and these
swimmers served as my initial customer discovery.
Many of the initial conversations with swimmers who entered their email
on my landing page reinforced my hypothesis. Nearly all of the swimmers I
spoke with clearly articulated their struggle with writing workouts and
training plans and improving their technique. That’s exactly the problem
MySwimPro was launched to solve, and we continue to work towards this
every single day.
Fast forward a few years, and MySwimPro has grown to become an
international community of swimmers with a globally distributed team! We
are at the forefront of the swimming industry with our award-winning app,
and we produce media content daily that educates, inspires, and entertains the
next generation of swimmers.
We believe that everyone is one day away from achieving their gold
medal moment and we exist to empower people to achieve their dreams.
We’re all about empowering human potential for swimmers of all levels. In
2019, I was fortunate to give a TEDx talk titled Idea to App of the Year. It’s
the Cliff Notes version of how MySwimPro went from an idea to an award
winning app with global impact.
My TEDx talk will be linked in the supplemental online companion
course, and you can also watch it hosted on my YouTube channel. On my
channel, I also share a behind-the-scenes look at what it’s like to build a
global technology and media company.
For everyone who joins the supplemental online companion course, I’ll
be offering a deep discount to our subscription plans for all new members.
All this information is available at swimlikeapro.org.
Launching World Swim Day
World Swim Day is an international holiday that promotes living a
healthy lifestyle through swimming and raises awareness for the importance

--- Page 147 Text ---
of water safety. There are over 100 million fitness swimmers in the world,
and yet there are over 4 billion people who do not know how to swim.
World Swim Day was actually born out of a marketing meeting at
MySwimPro Inc. in 2018. At the time, I had a weekly marketing strategy
meeting with our then Marketing Director, Paige Walters. We were
brainstorming ways to bring attention to the sport of swimming when I asked
when World Swim Day was.
After a few quick google searches, we realized there was no World Swim
Day. How could this be? How is there not an international day for one of the
most participated in forms of physical activity in the world?
As an entrepreneur, you must live in the future and build what’s missing.
I believe this deep down and decided to take action. That same day, I
acquired the domain addresses worldswimday.com and worldswimday.org,
and we started brainstorming what World Swim Day would look like!
World Swim Day was initially conceived to increase participation in
swimming and promote water safety inclusive of geography, language, and
skills. In the first year, World Swim Day saw participation from swimmers in
over 100 countries and funds were raised for three learn-to swim non-profit
organizations.
In the following years, the event has grown to global sponsors,
independently hosted meetups, and incredible stories shared on social media
with the hashtag #WorldSwimDay. The goal is for World Swim Day to
continue to inspire and empower people around the world to be active in the
water, lead happier lives, and reflect on everything the sport has to offer.
You can learn more about supporting World Swim Day at
worldswimday.org.
So where do you go from here?
It’s been an incredible journey launching MySwimPro, World Swim Day,
and now this book! I’m so thankful for the opportunity to serve a global
community and give back to the sport I love so much.
Take every opportunity to enjoy and appreciate the water. The feeling of
weightlessness we experience while swimming is unlike anything else we’ll
ever experience. This magical feeling is one of the many joys the sport of
swimming offers humanity.
If you’d like to be a part of my swimming journey, you can follow me on
social media (@FaresKsebati). I’d love to connect with you! Tag me and use
the hashtag,

--- Page 148 Text ---
#S L AP
WIM IKE RO
It would mean the world to me if you shared my book with anyone else
you think it will help. You can also take a photo with the book and tag me on
social media. I’d love to see all the amazing pools and beaches from around
the world that our community swims in! I can’t wait to share your amazing
pictures with the swimming community!
The supplemental online companion course is another great way to stay
connected and I will continue to add and update content to this website as
time goes on. We also have a vibrant facebook group for the MySwimPro
global community. This is a free group that will also be linked in the
companion course.
I’m very active online and in that Facebook group, so I look forward to
seeing you there. That group is amazing, and I guarantee you will be inspired
by over 10,000 other swimmers from 100+ countries who are passionate
about improving their swimming!
Thank you again! I’m looking forward to following your swimming
journey for decades to come.
Happy swimming :)

--- Page 149 Text ---
APPENDICES

--- Page 150 Text ---
APPENDIX I: SWIMMING GLOSSARY
E and activity has its own unique language. This “jargon” or
VERY SPORT
specialized terminology associated with a particular sport or industry evolves
over time. In swimming, it can feel like a different language entirely if you’re
not familiar with some basic terms and phrases.
This appendix section highlights some of the most common swimming
terminology used in this book and in the real world. Please don’t let these
terms or any swimming lingo discourage you from reaching your full
potential in the sport. A full swimming terms library is linked in the
supplemental online companion course as well!
WORKOUT TERMS
Set: Full workouts are broken up into sets. Sets are composed of
four elements: The number of repetitions, distance to be swum,
stroke type, and interval.
Interval: Interval is a unit of measure for time. In traditional
structured training systems, the total interval is composed of swim
time plus rest time.
Zone: Often referred to as “training zone” or “energy zone”, this
represents the perceived exertion level of a particular set in a
workout. It can also correspond to a specific heart rate zone.
Repetition: The number of reps in a set is the number of times you
swim that distance inside of a single set. The singular form of

--- Page 151 Text ---
repetitions is one “rep”.
Set Group: Also known as “Super Sets” in strength and
conditioning, a Set Group is simply a collection of more than one
set. Set groups can have multiple repetitions, so a Set Group with
two repetitions means you perform all of the sets in that Set Group
twice.
TECHNIQUE
Streamline: Streamline is the fundamental body position in
swimming and is used as a starting point for pushing off the wall or
diving into the water. A good streamline starts with one hand over
the other with the arms extended above the head. The goal is to
minimize resistance from fingertips to toes.
SWOLF: This is a metric used to measure swimming efficiency.
SWOLF is calculated per-length as the sum of the time it took you
to swim the lap, and the number of strokes it took you to swim it
normalized to a 25-meter pool. For example, if you swim 25 meters
in 20 seconds and take 20 arms strokes (10 stroke cycles), your
SWOLF score would be 40.
Open Turn: A technique used to change direction at the wall.
Primarily used in Breaststroke and Butterfly. This type of turn is
initiated with both hands touching the wall simultaneously.
Flip Turn: A somersault at the wall used to change direction.
Primarily used in freestyle and backstroke.
Bilateral Breathing: A technique used in freestyle in order to
breathe on both the right and left sides. Usually every three or five
arm strokes.
Distance Per Stroke (DPS): The total distance traveled per arm
stroke or stroke cycle. Typically a technique used to improve stroke
length and overall efficiency. The fewer strokes you take per length,
the higher your DPS.
Breakout Stroke: The first stroke taken from a streamline position
after pushing off the wall or diving in the water. The first stroke,
and often the first few strokes, carries the most speed from
momentum generated from wall or racing start.

--- Page 152 Text ---
TRAINING
Kick: Making forward progress in the water without using your
arms (legs only). You may use a kickboard to help keep your head
above water, or you can hold a streamline on your back or stomach.
Kick sets are meant to help you focus on improving your kick, so
you can kick stronger during regular swimming.
Drill: An exercise used to focus on a specific element of swimming
technique. It's usually a modified version of a competition stroke
like swimming Butterfly with only one arm, or swimming freestyle
with your hands in a fist position.
Pull: Swimming without the use of your legs. This can be done
with or without equipment including a pull buoy, paddles, or a
rubber tube around the ankles.
IM: Short for “Individual Medley”, a style of swimming that
involves swimming all four major competitive strokes in the order
of: Butterfly, Backstroke, Breaststroke, Freestyle. For example, a
100 IM would be 25 butterfly, 25 backstroke, 25 breaststroke, 25
freestyle.
Split: The amount of time it takes to swim a specific distance,
usually in reference to a singular repetition of a set or segment of a
set or race.
Negative Split: Swimming faster on the second half of an
individual repetition, set, set group, or entire workout. This can also
apply to an entire race distance.
Build: Swimming a specific set, set group, or race in a way that you
increase speed by the end of it. You can think of it as "Speeding up"
within the specific segment.
Descend: Swimming faster by time over the duration of a set or
repetition. Descending splits over a series of repetitions is a
common training methodology that is similar to building and
negative split.
Ascend: Swimming slower by time over the duration of a set or
repetition.
Best Average: Swimming as fast as possible, maintaining the same
speed on every repetition within a set. Often corresponding to the

--- Page 153 Text ---
“SP1” energy zone.
Aerobic Training: An energy pathway which requires your cells to
use oxygen. If you are training aerobically, the idea is that your
cells will generally not need to enter anaerobic respiration to
produce energy. These types of sets are lower intensity over a
longer duration of time.
Anaerobic Training: An energy pathway that does not require
oxygen and is generally only used if oxygen is not available. If you
are training anaerobically, the idea is that your cells will produce
most of their energy using anaerobic respiration. These types of sets
are high intensity, shorter durations that often produce lactic acid.
EQUIPMENT
Fins
Paddles
Snorkel
Pull Buoy
Kick Board
These are the most common pieces of equipment that you’ll see on the pool
deck. In the supplemental online course, I share specific pieces of equipment
to purchase in my Swim Like A Pro Equipment Guide. In this list, you’ll
find links of different products to purchase for swimmers of different skill
levels and goals.

--- Page 154 Text ---
APPENDIX II: FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
O , I’ve had the incredible opportunity to field
VER THE LAST DECADE
thousands of questions from swimmers all over the world. Oftentimes, there
are a few core themes that these questions fall into. Some swimmers are
focused on losing weight, while others are more concerned with dropping
time. Many swimmers simply want to know how to get started with choosing
a workout plan. In the supplemental online companion course, I made a
specific video answering all of the questions below and more.
How do I lose weight swimming?
How many times per week should I swim?
What equipment should I use?
When should I use equipment?
Why should I swim anything other than freestyle?
How do I stop my legs from sinking?
Should I do dryland before or after swimming?
Can I swim while pregnant?
How do I get ready for my first open water race?
Do I need a swim coach?
I’ll continue adding video responses to the most common questions
swimmers have in the online course. You can join the online course at
swimlikeapro.org, I’ll be creating new videos directly responding to
questions from the community. I’m looking forward to answering your
questions!

--- Page 155 Text ---
ABOUT MYSWIMPRO
M S P a technology and media company founded in 2015 to help
Y WIM RO IS
swimmers improve their performance and health. The company developed
the MySwimPro mobile app, which offers personalized training plans
including swim and dryland workouts. In 2019, the app passed 1 million
downloads and has been translated into 9 languages.
MySwimPro was named by Apple as the Best App of the Year for the
Apple Watch in 2016 and has been featured in international publications like
Sports Illustrated. The app has a global community of members in over 180
countries. The team is 100% remote, led by its co-founder and CEO, Fares
Ksebati.
TO LEARN MORE ABOUT MYSWIMPRO, GO TO:
myswimpro.com

--- Page 156 Text ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
FARES KSEBATI is an entrepreneur, swimmer, coach, and mentor, helping people turn their dreams into
a reality. He has been featured by Apple, Forbes, and Men’s Health. Fares is the Co-Founder of
MySwimPro, World Swim Day, and multiple business ventures that have impacted millions of people
around the world.
Fares is an avid world traveler and keynote speaker. He is a Bosphorus Cross-continental swimmer,
and three time U.S. Masters Swimming individual national champion. His goal is to inspire and
empower others to take action on their dreams. He advocates for a growth mindset and continuous self-
improvement! Follow his journey on social media @FaresKsebati.
TO LEARN MORE ABOUT FARES, GO TO:
www.faresksebati.com

--- Page 158 Text ---
SWIM LIKE A PRO ONLINE VIDEO COURSE
T your swimming journey, I created an online video course that
O HELP GUIDE
includes swim drills, workouts, links to additional video content and an
exclusive Q&A section that will grow over time. I truly believe that the best
way to learn something is through multiple touch points.
This is your first step towards success with this book as I have created a
unique video for each chapter. You’ll be able to see and hear my explanation
for each concept and stroke technique in this book. Seeing a visual
representation of each concept can make all the difference in how fast you
make progress, so I highly recommend you join the online course.
You can get started right away by visiting swimlikeapro.org or by
opening the camera app on your phone. Hold your phone over the QR code
below. Your phone will automatically direct you to the website where you
can follow the instructions to unlock all the video content.
The online course has bonus video sections, a swim workout template,
and interviews with swimmers who have lost weight, completed Ironmans,
and even won Olympic Medals! While the online video course is not
required, I encourage you to check it out.
Visit the link below to unlock access to the full Swim Like A Pro
experience:

--- OCR from Page 159 Image 1 ---
ONLINE COURSE

Mesa

SCAN THE CODE
SWIM

VIDEO LIBRARY

Q&E&A

--- Page 160 Text ---
GET CUSTOM STROKE ANALYSIS & COACHING
W you like me to analyze your stroke technique?
OULD
Swimming with proper technique is critical to swimming faster and
reaching your full potential! I can analyze your stroke technique by providing
detailed audio and visual feedback. I will provide a comprehensive analysis
of your stroke, mark the footage with real-time telestration, and offer
corrective feedback and drill recommendations.
All you need to do is upload your video online, choose the analysis &
coaching package on the same website as the Swim Like A Pro online course,
and I’ll take care of the rest! I can analyze all four competitive strokes, starts,

--- Page 161 Text ---
turns, drills, and even dryland training. No special equipment required. We
can even set up a time for a video call to discuss your technique and a
strategy to help you reach your goals!

--- Page 162 Text ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thank you, first and foremost, to the MySwimPro global community who
have motivated and supported me through the years. Thank YOU for reading
this book, sharing it with your friends and being a part of the swimming
family! I’ve seen the impact swimming has had on so many people’s lives,
and I’m so humbled to be a small part of these success stories. I’m so
thankful to be a part of a community that is supportive and pushes me to be
the best version of myself. I will continue to serve you through the work that
I do.
I’d like to give a huge shout out to my family. When my parents moved
to the United States, they signed my brother and I up for swim lessons to
learn how to swim, an opportunity they didn’t have growing up in Damascus,
Syria. I fell in love with the water and continue to swim to this day because
of that. I turned this passion for swimming into a business that now helps
people all over the world improve their performance and health and I’m
thankful for my family's continued encouragement. To my parents, I love
you! To my brother and sister, I love you!
Another important group of people I’d like to thank are all the swim
coaches I’ve had along the way. From my summer league, high school, and
club team, thank you to: Bill Thomson, Eric Gunderson, John Fodell,
Elizabeth Nelson, Ryan Wheaton, Joe Ryan, Scott MacDonald, and many
more for pushing me to do my best in and out of the water.
Huge shout out to my collegiate swim team and coaches, Sean Peters and
Bryce Pitters. A huge thank you to the Wayne State University swim team for
taking me in and allowing me to represent my school in swimming! I’m so
lucky to have had this opportunity and make life-long friends. It was also an

--- Page 163 Text ---
incredible experience to learn more about the sport and take my own
swimming to the next level!
Thank you to the MySwimPro team, our ambassadors, advisors, and
investors. Thank you to my co-founders of MySwimPro, Adam Oxner and
Michael Allon, for taking a leap of faith on me and my crazy ideas. Thank
you to our team: Benjamin Hendricks, Paige Walters, Arthur Shi, Max Bilan,
Charlie Brown, Cenk Arioz, Lorenza Padilla, Carol Caldas, Daniel
Plantamura, Taylor Holmes and Steve Dalal. Thank you to our advisors:
Peter Vanderkaay, Todd Sullivan, Mitch Thrower, and many more mentors in
the startup and swimming community.
A few more acknowledgements are in order! The original Di team of
Alex Bordyukov, Valentino Smith, and Casey Browning! We trained together
over the years and created a legendary hype video. Thank you to Michigan
Masters swimming and a huge shout out to my swim teammates at Wayne
State University and our epic Harlem Shake dance video that went viral!
Thank you also to the masters swim group at the Detroit Athletic Club!
Thank you to Lauren Johnson for helping me make this book a reality.
Thank you to everyone who agreed to help promote and share MySwimPro
or Swim Like A Pro in some way, shape, or form, thank you! To all those
who allowed me to speak at your events, come on podcasts, and video
interviews, thank you!
To all who read this, here’s to you and your future. I wish you the very
best and happy swimming :)