
--- Page 1 Text ---
THE BOOK
This is the first book in a 3-book-series called “Coach Blythe’s Swim
Workouts“. It contains 100 workouts that focus on improving general
swimming efficiency, with specific workouts for each of the competitive
swimming strokes. The workouts in this book blend swimming drills and
conditioning sets that total up to 2,000 yards/meters. Each workout is
accompanied by a “Focus Point” to help swimmers zero in on stroke
improvements by eliminating drag, improving feel for the water, and
swimming in a core-centered manner.
THE AUTHOR
Blythe Lucero has been coaching swimming for more than 25 years. She
currently oversees two teams, Berkeley Aquatic Masters and Berkeley
Barracudas, where she brings her passion for swimming to the
development and training of swimmers of all ages and abilities, from
novice to world class. Blythe grew up in Berkeley, California in a large
athletic family. She swam competitively in her youth, achieving All-
American status in college. In addition to coaching swimming, she trains
Water Safety Instructors for the Red Cross. She also works as a professional
graphic designer. The 3-book-series “Coach Blythe’s Swim Workouts”
follows the successful book “The 100 Best Swimming Drills” published in
2007, and “Masters Swimming - A Manual” published in 2006.
SS
TT
UU
OO
KK
RR
OO
WW
MM
II
WW
SS
EE
UU
QQ
II
NN
HH
CC
EE
TT
Umschlag Technique Swim Workouts 09.02.2009 12:40 Uhr Seite 1
Coach Blythe’s Swim Workouts are appropriate for the self-coached
swimmer and triathlete, as well as for coaches looking for workout
content for the athletes they train.
ISBN 978-1-84126-268-0
$ 16.95 US/£ 12.95/A16.95
www.m-m-sports.com

--- OCR from Page 1 Image 1 ---
We ,

im:
Pps
OrKO
ul
[Ss

--- OCR from Page 1 Image 4 ---
LTT WWOUR IAC

tains 100 workouts
ctice sessions up to 2000 y
rn technique focus points

--- Page 2 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 1
TECHNIQUE SWIM WORKOUTS

--- Page 3 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 2
DEDICATION
To all those amazing Barracudas

--- Page 4 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 26.01.2009 11:50 Uhr Seite 3
TECHNIQUE
SWIM WORKOUTS
Blythe Lucero
Meyer & Meyer Sport

--- Page 5 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 4
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Technique Swim Workouts
Maidenhead: Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd., 2009
ISBN 978-1-84126-268-0
All rights reserved, especially the right to copy and distribute,
including the translation rights. No part of this work may be reproduced—
including by photocopy, microfilm or any other means—
processed, stored electronically, copied or distributed in any form whatsoever
without the written permission of the publisher.
© 2009 by Meyer & Meyer Sport (UK) Ltd.
Aachen, Adelaide, Auckland, Budapest, Cape Town, Graz, Indianapolis,
Maidenhead, Olten (CH), Singapore, Toronto
Member of the World
Sport Publishers' Association (WSPA)
www.w-s-p-a.org
Printed by: B.O.S.S Druck und Medien GmbH
ISBN: 978-1-84126-268-0
E-Mail: info@m-m-sports.com
www.m-m-sports.com

--- Page 6 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 5
Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6
GETTING THE MOST OUT OF THIS BOOK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Working Out with a Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Swimming Well . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
Correct Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Focus Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Swimming Often . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
Your Workout Routine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
When Enough Is Enough . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Achieving Better Swimming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Measuring Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
Valuing the Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
GETTING STARTED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Workout Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Workout Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Summary of Drills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
Freestyle Drills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
Backstroke Drills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27
Breaststroke Drills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .33
Butterfly Drills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
WORKOUTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
TTeecchhnniiqquuee WWoorrkkoouuttss ffoorr FFrreeeessttyyllee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4477
TTeecchhnniiqquuee WWoorrkkoouuttss ffoorr BBaacckkssttrrookkee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7722
TTeecchhnniiqquuee WWoorrkkoouuttss ffoorr BBrreeaassttssttrrookkee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .110011
TTeecchhnniiqquuee WWoorrkkoouuttss ffoorr BBuutttteerrffllyy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .112299
CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159
CREDITS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .160
5

--- Page 7 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 6
IIIINNNNTTTTRRRROOOODDDDUUUUCCCCTTTTIIIIOOOONNNN
INTRODUCTION
I have always been of the opinion that it is best for a swimmer to
workout with a coach present. I have developed this conclusion over
many years, first as a swimmer, then as a swimming teacher and
coach. This opinion has been reinforced frequently, both during my
own experience in the water, as an athlete in training, and then from
the deck, while observing the development of swimmers.
When a coach is part of the equation, there to design training
content and routines, guide the progression of development, and
provide motivation and challenge when needed, a swimmer can
concentrate on swimming! Of all the things a coach does, one of the
primary benefits lies in his or her ability to observe stroke technique
in terms of swimming efficiency. This is an important part of a
swimmer’s progress at all stages of development. For beginning and
intermediate swimmers, the coach’s observation is critical to
identifying technique errors, doing it early, and giving corrective
feedback long before those errors become habit. For advanced
swimmers, the coach’s observation takes the form of refining stroke
technique, and providing reminders so the swimmer remains focused
on maintaining the most efficient style even during the most
strenuous training phase. I believe a coach’s observation and
feedback facilitates the most direct path for a swimmer’s
improvement.
There is an unspoken partnership between athlete and coach. In the
most successful of these relationships, both are engaged in all
aspects of the pursuit. A positive outcome comes from a situation
where both athlete and coach are dedicated to the training program,
committed to pursue improvement through specific and frequent
practice, and focused on the goal. I feel that it is really too much to
expect the athlete to do both jobs. Training can be extremely
demanding, and as if that is not enough, life is full of distractions
and responsibilities. Some days it is just easier for the swimmer to
say, “I’m sleeping in today,” “I’m getting out early,” or “I’m going to
skip that set,” if not for the fact that the he or she knows that the
6

--- Page 8 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 7
IIIINNNNTTTTRRRROOOODDDDUUUUCCCCTTTTIIIIOOOONNNN
coach is there on deck, holding up his or her end of the bargain. I
believe that a strong swimmer/coach relationship provides the
strongest foundation for good results from a training program.
Having made these points, there is something to be said for self-
guided discovery. If an athlete is successful in maintaining
motivation, taking on challenge and remaining focused on the goal,
the process of working on stroke technique can be a very valuable
experience. It takes a great deal of concentration and analysis to
isolate and identify stroke problems, and to refine stroke technique.
A swimmer who is able to do this well, and consistently, can find the
experience of working out on their own to be quite satisfactory.
Over the last 20 years, I have encountered quite a few requests for
workouts that swimmers can do on their own. I have provided
workouts to swimmers, on a temporary basis, to do on vacation, or
on work assignment out of town. Each time I have done so, I have
carefully prefaced the set of workouts with specific guidelines to the
swimmer.
I will do the same here:
In addition to conditioning, workout is your chance to practice
swimming right. It is of the utmost importance to pay close
attention to your stroke mechanics, and be very in tune with
what makes swimming more and less efficient. Without your
coach there to observe, it is now your job to identify and correct
stroke problems and continually refine your technique. You must
use your own senses to give you feedback. Above all, you must
promise not to lose sight of the fact that everyday you swim you
can learn more.
This is the first in a three book series, called “Coach Blythe’s Swim
Workouts.” This book contains technique-based workouts, designed
to help swimmers focus on the mechanics of swimming. The second
book in the series contains conditioning workouts, designed to help
swimmers build swimming capacity, strength and endurance. The
third book in the series contains challenging workouts, designed for
7

--- Page 9 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 8
Technique Swim Workouts
advanced level training. Swimmers may use the material in these
books to practice and train on their own, when the swimmer’s coach
is not present, or to create their own training routine, with the
guidelines above. Also, these books can be useful to coaches looking
for workout content to use in the training programs they design for
their teams.
The 100 workouts in this book focus on increasing general swimming
efficiency by improving swimming technique. The workouts blend
stroke drills and drill/swim bridging sets, in a format that will help
build better technique, and build the endurance required to perform
that technique over time. Workouts in this collection total up to
2,000 yards/meters. Specific workouts are included for each of the
competitive swimming strokes. Each workout is designed as a
balanced practice session unto itself, with warm up, progressions of
technique work, progressions of effort and a cool down.
Without the intent of discouraging anyone taking up the wonderful
sport of swimming, this book is not a Learn to Swim manual. Users
of the book are expected to have basic water skills, including the
ability to be able to completely submerge and recover to a standing
position, float, tread water, and more forward with arms and legs.
As well as advanced beginner and intermediate level swimmers,
this book is also appropriate for advanced swimmers seeking a
“technique tune up,” in the journey toward more efficient swimming.
8

--- Page 10 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 9
9

--- Page 11 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 10
10

--- Page 12 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 11
Getting the MostOutof this Book
GETTING THE MOST OUT
OF THIS BOOK
Working Out with a Purpose
Swimmers workout to achieve better swimming. Whether you define
better swimming as more swimming capacity, endurance or more
speed, better swimming is more efficient swimming. The workouts in
this book are designed with one purpose: to help the swimmer
increase swimming efficiency by making technique improvements. A
more efficient swimmer is able to expend less energy, and therefore
swim longer and farther with less fatigue. Swimming can then
become a more rewarding activity. A swimmer who can swim longer
without getting tired can then apply his or her attention and energy
to building a good base of endurance. With increased swimming
capacity, the swimmer may choose to train for faster swimming.
So, this collection of workouts is part of the process of becoming a
better swimmer overall. This process does not happen immediately. It
takes time, focus and practice. Patience and dedication are important
qualities to bring with you in this process. If attention and time are
given to swimming right, endurance, capacity for yardage and speed
will happen.
The basic formula to keep in mind is this:
SWIMMING WELL + SWIMMING OFTEN = BETTER SWIMMING
Swimming Well
The first element in the formula for better swimming is swimming
well. Swimming is mechanically complex, and it is easy to get
distracted with the effort that is initially required to get from point A
to point B. Remember that it is more important to be focused on
perfecting the mechanical aspects of swimming before turning your
focus to swimming more and more yards.
11

--- Page 13 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 12
Technique Swim Workouts
CORRECT PRACTICE
A respected swim coach once said, “Doing a drill 99% correctly is
100% wrong.” That seems harsh, but it is true. If a swimmer
practices incorrectly, they are reinforcing poor technique. It is
therefore a top priority to practice each drill, each stroke, each set as
mechanically perfect as possible. At first it may seem very robot-like,
even unnatural. Give it a chance. Remember that every skill
improves with practice. Driving, typing and dancing are good
examples of skills that improve with practice. We start by practicing
them slowly, step-by-step. Then, gradually, they become comfortable,
even automatic. There comes a time when we realize that we are
performing a complex skill well, without thinking about it.
FOCUS POINTS
Each workout in this collection begins with a “Focus Point” to help
swimmers zero in on specific issues that the workout emphasizes,
through specially chosen drills and sets. “Focus Points” address
important issues including body position, kick productivity,
eliminating drag, improving feel for the water, alignment, swimming
in a core-centered manner, stroke coordination and leverage. It is
important to think about the particular focus point, or theme
throughout the workout, in order to get the full benefit of stroke
improvement exercises.
Each workout asks the swimmer to progressively build mechanical
skills into a complete swimming stroke. Each step of the way, the
swimmer should try to relate what he or she is asked to do to the
“Focus Point.” At times, it will be frustrating and confusing. Drills can
be awkward and clumsy at first. Again, remember to be patient, and
keep trying!
Sometimes the point of a particular drill can be elusive. If a particular
drill is continually not making sense to you, ask a coach for
feedback. Remember, the first step in becoming a better swimmer is
to swim correctly.
As the swimmer improves each aspect of his or her stroke, it
positively affects another. One by one the pieces will fall into place.
12

--- Page 14 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 13
Getting the MostOutof this Book
Swimming Often
The second element in the formula for swimming well is swimming
often. It is important to create a good workout routine that you can
stick with. In addition to the considerations in this section, use your
knowledge of your own experiences with other physical activities,
and skill attainment to make a routine that works for you.
YOUR WORKOUT ROUTINE
It is well documented that frequency of practice is a key learning
strategy. This means that the more often we are exposed to the skill
we are trying to master, the faster the rate of learning. So, in general,
a swimmer who swims four or five days a week will improve more
quickly than a swimmer who swims once a week. This is something
to keep in mind when planning your workout routine. If there is too
much time between workouts, you will find yourself having to
backtrack and repeat activities in order to refresh your memory and
“feel” for the water, to regain the advances you made at your
previous workout. A workout routine that keeps practice sessions
closer together allows the swimmer’s body and mind to hold on to
the forward steps taken at the previous workout, so that valuable
repetition will work to reinforce and strengthen the swimmer’s
understanding and muscle memory, instead of first having to re-
establish it.
Workout frequency, however, must be carefully balanced with
recovery time. Swimming well requires the use of almost every
muscle in the body. It is a strenuous activity, especially as a swimmer
is working on building capacity. Without ample rest between
workouts, the swimmer cannot continue to adapt to the workload
over time. A swimmer who is constantly fatigued is less motivated
and less able to concentrate on the important skills they are
practicing. This means that recovery time is an essential ingredient in
becoming a better swimmer. So, in general a swimmer who swims
four to five days a week will improve, over the long term, more
quickly than a swimmer who swims seven days a week.
A workout routine of every other day is a good option for many
swimmers. Some swimmers do well with a schedule of swimming two
13

--- Page 15 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 14
Technique Swim Workouts
days in a row, then taking a day off. For some, swimming each
weekday, then taking weekends off works well. Developing a workout
routine that works for you will take some trial and error. It is also
something that will change over time as your skills and capacity for
swimming increases.
In general, it is important to take at least two days off a week.
Always consult a doctor before beginning a fitness routine such as
this.
WHEN ENOUGH IS ENOUGH
Sometimes, there comes a point where a swimmer has reached the
limit of benefit from a workout. These workouts are demanding on
two levels, both physically and mentally. It is easy to fall into the
trap of thinking that a workout of only about 2,000 yards is easy
enough to complete. Remember, completing the workout is only part
of the challenge. Benefiting from the content of the workout is more
important. To make sure this is happening, regularly ask yourself the
following questions during your workout:
(cid:2) Am I too tired to concentrate on the point of the workout?
(cid:2) Am I just doing empty yards?
If the answer to either question is “yes,” then, it is time to stop. Start
again tomorrow.
Also, if you find yourself struggling to make it through a set, you will
not be able to concentrate of the point of the set. So, if the distances
called for are overwhelming, cut them in half.
Achieving Better Swimming
By swimming well, and swimming often, a swimmer arrives at better
swimming. It is important to remember that achieving better
swimming is a process. It doesn’t happen all at once, it occurs
gradually and continually. It is important to be aware of your
progress, and celebrate it along the way.
14

--- Page 16 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 15
Getting the MostOutof this Book
MEASURING PROGRESS
Progress can be defined in many ways. Capacity for distance, and
capacity for speed are two ways to evaluate progress. Ultimately,
regarding this collection of workouts, progress in swimming efficiency
is the most important measure of improvement.
Measuring progress requires a starting point to be established, then
regular comparisons to that starting point must be done.
A swimmer’s progress in terms of capacity for distance can easily be
measured in yardage:
(cid:2) How far can a swimmer swim, non-stop, compared to the
previous week?
(cid:2) How many yards can a swimmer complete in 10 minutes,
compared to the previous week?
Progress in terms of capacity for speed can be measured in terms of
time:
(cid:2) How long does it take to swim 200 yards, compared to the
previous week?
(cid:2) How fast can a swimmer swim 50 yards, compared to last week?
Improvements in yardage and time can reflect improvements in
swimming efficiency. An additional way to measure swimming
efficiency is counting strokes:
(cid:2) How many strokes does it take to cross the pool, compared to
last week?
(cid:2) Can the same number of strokes be maintained for four or eight
lengths in a row?
As a part of your overall plan, it is a good idea to measure progress
regularly, to insure that improvement is occurring and continuing.
Choose a regular interval at which you measure progress, for
instance once a week, or once a month. There should be enough
15

--- Page 17 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 16
Technique Swim Workouts
time between measures to allow for skills to develop and progress to
be build, but not too much time to continue practicing in a manner
that is not producing results.
If improvements are not shown, repeatedly when measuring
progress, it provides important feedback. The swimmer may need:
(cid:2) more time to practice each drill
(cid:2) to practice the drills more precisely
(cid:2) to change his or her workout routine to allow more recovery, or
more exposure
(cid:2) to consult a coach for observation and feedback
VALUING THE PROCESS
Improvement may not happen every single time you measure your
progress. This is natural. It is not the end of the world, and it is
certainly not any indication that you should give up your pursuit of
better swimming. Consider that swimming in and of itself is a
rewarding experience. It is good for you on all levels: physically,
mentally and emotionally. Notice the muscle tone that you are
gaining. Notice the things you work out in your head while you are
swimming. Notice the smile on your face after you swim. Your
swimming is time well spent. Enjoy every minute of it.
16

--- Page 18 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 17
WorkoutTerminology
GETTING STARTED
This collection of workouts is organized by stroke emphasis. The first
25 workouts focus on freestyle technique. The next 25 focus on
backstroke technique, then 25 on breaststroke technique, and 25 on
butterfly. It is important to be familiar with the presentation of the
workouts to get the most benefit from them. This section defines the
terminology used within the workouts, describes the format in which
the workouts appear, and finally, provides a summary of the
technique drills that are called for within the workouts.
WorkoutTerminology
It will be important to be familiar with the following terms and
swimming jargon used throughout this collection of workouts,
appearing here in alphabetical order:
(cid:2) 25, 50, 75, 100, 200:
Refers to the distance to be done in terms of a 25 yard/meter
pool. A 25 would be one length, a 50 would be two lengths, a
100 would be four lengths, etc.
(cid:2) 4 x 25:
Refers to the number of times a distance is to be done, for
instance, in this example, 25 yards will be done four times
(cid:2) 50 Easy:
A short recovery swim, and a chance to reflect on the set that
you just finished
(cid:2) Alternating 25s (or 50s) of:
Calls switching between two activities after a specific distance
(cid:2) Arms Leading:
The floating position with the arms extended over the head
17

--- Page 19 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 18
Technique Swim Workouts
(cid:2) Cool Down:
The final exercise period of easy, continuous swimming that is
important to gradually return the heart to its regular rhythm, and
rinse out the muscles
(cid:2) Count Strokes:
Counting the total number of strokes it takes per length of the
pool
(cid:2) Drill:
An exercise designed to practice a specific skill or aspect of a
stroke correctly
(cid:2) Drill/Swim:
An exercise that begins alternates drill and swim, in order to use
the skills emphasized in the drill in practice while swimming the
full stroke
(cid:2) Fast Freestyle (or other stroke):
Using a faster tempo, and applying more power to move across
the pool faster than usual
(cid:2) Flutter Kick:
The kick done with Freestyle and Backstroke, using an
alternating leg action
(cid:2) Focus Point:
The theme or emphasis of the workout
(cid:2) Head Leading:
The floating position with the arms at the side of the body
(cid:2) Kick:
Leg action only. Akickboard may be used for front flutter kick, or
breaststroke kick, however, backstroke kick and dolphin kick
should always be done without a kickboard.
18

--- Page 20 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 19
WorkoutTerminology
Kicking is an excellent aerobic activity and an important way to
build swimming endurance
(cid:2) Kick – other than breaststroke kick:
Any kick other than breaststroke kick. The reason for this is that
breaststroke kick should only be done when the knees are
completely warmed up to avoid injury
(cid:2) Pull:
For freestyle only. Using a pull buoy to float your lower body,
practice the upper body action of the stroke, including arm
stroke, roll, alignment, and use of core
(cid:2) Stationary Drill:
Adrill that is done without covering distance in the pool
(cid:2) Swim:
An exercise using the full stroke as specified
(cid:2) Underwater streamlined kick:
Kicking while totally submerged, arms extended and tight over
the ears, chin tucked, core engaged to be as streamlined as
possible
(cid:2) w/15 SR:
Refers to the amount of rest (R) in seconds (S) between swims.
For example, in this case: with 15 seconds rest
(cid:2) Warm up:
Initial exercise period of sustained, medium intensity swimming
lasting at least ten minutes, or at least 10% of your total
yardage. Also an opportunity to review what you covered in your
previous workout, and to refresh your “feel” for the water
(cid:2) Your Choice:
Swimmer chooses the stroke or drill
19

--- Page 21 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 20
Technique Swim Workouts
Workout Format
Each workout begins with a Focus Point, and ends with the total
yardage. Focus Points are designed to orient the swimmer to the
theme, or goal of the workout. Total yardage is included as one
measure of a fitness routine. All of the workouts in this book total
about a mile, some a little more, some a little less. It is important to
remember, however, that the main measure of this collection of
workouts is not miles swum, but improvement in swimming
technique, and increased swimming efficiency.
Workout content is presented in a sequential for-one activity after
the other, using a standardized set of directions. Each activity or
set appears as a string of commands. Figure 1 diagrams these
commands.
2. Next, the distance and,
1. First, the type of activity
if more than one, the 3. Then, the actual activity
is stated, followed by a
quantity of repeats is is stated, like this:
colon, like this:
stated.
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR –align entry forward
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill/Swim: 200 alternating 25s of “Catch Up”/Freestyle
–always one hand reaching
6. When a double space
between activities or
sets appears, it means
take a rest, reflect on 5. Points of emphasis for
4. Next, if it is a set with
the activities you have the activity are stated
repeats, the rest is
done and prepare for next, following a dash,
stated, like this:
the next one. like this:
Figure 1 Explanation of workout format
20

--- Page 22 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 21
Freestyle Drills
Summary of Drills
Drills are a primary component of this collection of workouts. Drills are
a way to work on a stroke, or a particular aspect of a stroke by
isolating, emphasizing or repeating an exercise. The following drills are
called for by name within the workouts, appearing in quotes. In this
summary, they are grouped by stroke, and are listed in alphabetical
order. Each drill is accompanied here by a brief description of how to
perform it, and its purpose. It is important to study the drills and
understand how to do them correctly to get their full benefit.
Most of these drills are also described in complete detail in the book,
“The 100 Best Swimming Drills,” also by Blythe Lucero. The book is an
excellent resource to accompany this collection of workouts. In addition
to step-by-step descriptions, each drill is illustrated, and its purpose is
clearly outlined. Feedback charts also follow each drill, to address
common problems that can interfere with feeling the point of the drills.
FREESTYLE DRILLS
3 Kick Switch – To feel the rolling action of the stroke, kick on side for
three kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your side, face in the water,
then switch sides, and arm positions, and repeat (see Figure 2)
Figure 2
Kick in a side floating position, then switch sides and resume an
aligned float and Kick
21

--- Page 23 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 22
Technique Swim Workouts
6 Kick Switch – To feel length of stroke and alignment, kick on side
for six kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your side, face in the
water, then switch sides, and arm positions, and repeat (see Figure 2)
12 Kick Switch – To feel alignment, the rolling action of the stroke,
and the length of the stroke, kick on side for twelve kicks, low arm
leading, other arm at your side, face in the water, then switch sides,
and arm positions, and repeat (see Figure 2)
3 Strokes, 3 Kicks – To emphasize the rolling action of the stroke,
take three regular freestyle strokes with kicking, then kick only in the
side floating position, low arm leading, other arm at your side, for
three extra kicks, face in the water, then do three more freestyle
strokes, then kick only floating on the other side for three extra
kicks, and repeat
3 Strokes, 6 Kicks – To emphasize the rolling action of the stroke,
and constant kicking, take three regular freestyle strokes with
kicking, then kick only in the side floating position, low arm leading,
other arm at your side, for six extra kicks, face in the water, then do
Figure 3
Point forward, in the direction Avoid leading your stroke off
you are going, with your thumb course with a “collapsed wrist”
22

--- Page 24 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 23
Freestyle Drills
three more freestyle strokes, then kick only floating on the other side
for six extra kicks, and repeat
All Thumbs Drill – Freestyle arm stroke extension actively pitching
the wrist so the thumbs point in the direction you are swimming for
better alignment and catch (see Figure 3)
Catch Up – Like regular freestyle, except one arm catches up to the
other in front, emphasizing that one arm should always be reaching,
and the other stroking. Start with both arms leading, then do a
complete freestyle stroke with one arm, when both arms are back in
the leading position, do a freestyle stroke with the other arm,
continue
Dead Arm Freestyle – Single arm freestyle with the still arm at your
side, breathing toward the still arm side, to practice using hip
rotation to breathe
Fist Freestyle – Freestyle
with fists, using the
forearms to press against
the water to develop a high
elbow arm stroke
Floppy Hand Drill – Regular
freestyle except during each
recovery, flop the hand
back and forth to check for
relaxation
Freestyle with Dolphin –
Regular freestyle arms with
a dolphin kick each time
Figure 4
your hand strikes the
Freestyle with dolphin.
water in front, to practice
Coordinate the downbeats
coordinating the arm and
of your feet with your catch.
leg actions (see Figure 4)
23

--- Page 25 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 24
Technique Swim Workouts
Head Lead Kick – Flutter kick
with your arms at your sides
to practice positive floatation
Heads Up Freestyle – Rapid
freestyle with your head up,
as used in water polo, looking
straight ahead to practice
catching water and constant
kicking
Hip Skating – Regular
freestyle with an imaginary
ice skate on each hip bone
in front. Achieve a skating
rhythm to practice core
leverage. Eventually try to
feel the blade of the skate
extending all the way from
the hip to the fingertip of
the reaching hand to feel
leverage and alignment at
the same time (see Figure 5)
Figure 5
Skate on your hips
Log Roll – Floating in a head lead position, and kicking, do a quarter
roll, hold for 5 seconds, do a quarter roll, continue, generate actions
from the hips and stabilize from the core to practice core-centered
swimming
One Arm Freestyle – Single arm freestyle with the still arm leading to
isolate the arm stroke action
One Leg Kick – Using a kickboard, kick rapid flutter kick with one leg
only to develop a productive kick
24

--- Page 26 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 25
Freestyle Drills
Pendulum – To feel
core leverage, switch
rhythmically, like a
pendulum, from one side
floating position, with low
arm leading, and other arm
in high elbow recovery
position, to the other side,
continue (see Figure 6)
Figure 6
Feel the pendulum effect
Pull/Push Freestyle – Regular freestyle isolating the pulling motion
from full extension to the shoulder, and the pushing motion from the
shoulder to the end of the stroke past the hip (see Figure 7)
Figure 7
The path of the freestyle arm stroke underwater
25

--- Page 27 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 26
Technique Swim Workouts
Sculling – Tracing a sideways figure eight with the hands, press out
with thumbs down, press in with thumbs up, in order to develop
better “feel” for the water
Shark Fin – To practice a well-balanced recovery, float in on your
side, low arm leading, kick steadily, and raise the elbow of the high
side recovering arm to a high pointing position, count to five, then
return arm it to your side, continue
Underwater Streamline Kick – Underwater kicking with arms leading
in a tight, narrow body position silhouette, using a quick, compact
kick to learn to eliminate drag (see Figure 8)
Figure 8
Compact kicking underwater in streamline
Vertical Kicking – Stationary flutter kicking in deep water from a
vertical position, vigorously enough to keep the face out of the
water, to develop a productive kick
26

--- OCR from Page 27 Image 1 ---
VES) Ss

--- Page 28 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 27
Backstroke Drills
BACKSTROKE DRILLS
Armpit Lift – Exaggerating the roll of the backstroke, by lifting the
armpit completely out of the water when the arm is at the highest
point of recovery, to feel that the high recovering side provides
leverage to the low stroking side of the body (see Figure 9)
Figure 9
Lift your armpit at the high point of recovery to feel
the leverage of the stroke
Backstroke 3 Stroke Switch – To feel the rolling action of the stroke,
kick on side for three kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your side,
face up, then switch sides, and arm positions
Backstroke 6 Kick Switch – To feel alignment, and the length of the
stroke, kick on side for six kicks, low arm leading, other arm at your
side, face up, then switch sides, and arm positions
Backstroke 12 Kick Switch – To feel alignment, the rolling action of
the stroke, and the length of the stroke, kick on side for twelve kicks,
low arm leading, other arm at your side, face up, then switch sides,
and arm positions
27

--- Page 29 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 28
Technique Swim Workouts
Backstroke Balance Drill with Cup – Regular backstroke with a cup
filled halfway with water balancing on your forehead to emphasize
that the head should be still, while the body rolls smoothly through
the stroke
Breathing Pocket – Regular backstroke exaggerating the roll to feel a
barrier from the water when the shoulder is at its highest point, and
using this moment to inhale
Boiling Water Drill – Rapid and productive backstroke kicking to
practice pushing the water upward with force, so it makes a
continuous boil, without the feet breaking the water’s surface (see
Figure 10)
Figure 10
Make the water boil by snapping your foot upward, but without
breaking the surface of the water
Clock Arms – First done standing in front of a mirror, practice feeling
the correct hand entry position at shoulder width or wider (at least
11:00 and 1:00). Repeat while swimming backstroke
Corkscrew – One stroke freestyle, then one stroke backstroke,
continue, feeling the deep catch of the backstroke accomplished by
rolling into your stroke
28

--- Page 30 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 29
Backstroke Drills
Cup on Forehead –
Quarter Turn - To achieve
a still or “independent
head,” do head leading
backstroke kicking, with
a cup half filled with
water balancing on your
forehead. Every twelve
kicks, rotate your body a
quarter turn, without
dropping the cup. First
to left, then back to flat,
then to right, then back
to flat, continue (see
Figure 11)
Figure 11
Achieve an “independent head”
Fist Backstroke – Backstroke with fists, using the forearms to press
against the water to develop a high elbow arm stroke
Float on Spine – Stationary drill where you practice the “banana
position,” a firm back floating position, where you achieve a straight
spine by rolling pelvis forward and contract the abdominals, so it
feels like you are in shaped sort of like a banana on your front, but
very straight on your back (see Figure 12)
Figure 12
Float on your spine and achieve the banana position
29

--- Page 31 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 30
Technique Swim Workouts
Locked Elbow Recovery Drill – Backstroke, recovering with actively
locked elbows for better alignment and stroke balance
No Knees Streamline Kick – Hand leading backstroke kicking. Check
for over-bent knees by holding a kickboard with one hand on the
water’s surface over the knees. If the knees bump the board, you are
raising your knees up, rather than dropping your heel
One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke – Single arm backstroke, with still
arm at your side, trying to isolate the pulling motion from full
extension to the shoulder, and the pushing motion from the shoulder
to the end of the stroke past the hip (see Figure 13)
Figure 13
The path of the backstroke underwater
One Arm Rope Climb – Floating on your back, with a lane line or rope
beside you, take hold of the line and pull your body past the point
where you are holding, simulating the feeling of efficient backstroke
Opposition Freeze Frame – Regular backstroke, stopping at various
times in the stroke to feel the many balance points of the opposing
arm stroke
Pigeon Toed Kicking – Backstroke kicking with the feet and knees
turned slightly inward to a pigeon toed position to achieve a larger
foot surface to push water upward, and less drag from knees
breaking the surface
30

--- OCR from Page 31 Image 1 ---
oor

ULL

--- Page 32 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 31
Backstroke Drills
Puppy Ears – Regular backstroke, pitching the hands actively
outward from the wrist during recovery, like a puppy’s ears, to
maintain a relaxed hand, rather than an inwardly pitched “collapsed
wrist.” Achieving a positive wrist position will set up an aligned entry
and good catch (see Figure 14)
Figure 14
Pitch your hand outward during A“collapsed wrist” leads to an
recovery for a well-aligned over-reached entry and poor
entry and good catch catch position
Rhythmic Breathing – Practicing patterns of breathing in backstroke,
including inhale on one stroke, exhale on the other, inhale and
exhale during each recovery, and, inhale during one stroke cycle, and
exhale on the next, in order to include rhythmic breathing as a
regular part of your backstroke
Roll, Pull/Roll, Push – Regular backstroke feeling that the
continuous rolling action provides momentum and leverage to the
pull and the push of the arm stroke. Roll down to catch and pull, roll
up to transition and push
Two Step Recovery – Regular backstroke, practicing an aligned
recovery by doing a half recovery, returning in a controlled manner to
the starting position, then doing a whole recovery
31

--- Page 33 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 32
Technique Swim Workouts
Up and Over – Practicing the path of the backstroke arm stroke,
where you catch deep then move your hand up and over your
stationary elbow, then press the hand past the hip (see Figure 15)
Figure 15
Sweep your hand up and over your elbow, past your shoulder
Vertical Kicking – Stationary flutter kicking in deep water from a
vertical position, vigorously enough to keep the face out of the
water, to develop a productive kick
Waterline Drill – Stationary drill where you practice achieving
a neutral head position, with the waterline surrounding your face and
covering your ears, for best backstroke floating position
32

--- Page 34 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 33
Breaststroke Drills
BREASTSTROKE DRILLS
2 Kick Breaststroke – To begin to bridge drill to swim, but to still
emphasize that each stroke begins and ends in a streamline position,
float in a hand lead position and do three breaststroke kicks in a
row, then one complete stroke cycle of arm stroke, breathing, kick
and glide, and repeat
3 Kick Breaststroke – To emphasize that each stroke begins and ends
in a streamline position, float in a hand lead position and do three
breaststroke kicks in a row, then do one complete stroke cycle of arm
stroke, breathing, kick and glide, and repeat
Breaststroke Alternating Dolphin and Breaststroke Kick –
Breaststroke arm stroke with a dolphin as you press out, and another
as you sweep in, then a complete breaststroke arm stroke, breath,
kick and glide, and repeat, emphasizing the rocking action and core
use in the breaststroke, and bridging from drill to swim
Breaststroke Arms with Flutter Kick – To isolate the arm stroke and
breathing and still have the benefit of kick momentum
Breaststroke Kick on
Back – Floating on back,
from a head leading
position, do breaststroke
kick, trying to touch your
heels to your finger tips,
while making sure that
your knees stay under
the water, to produce
a straight line from
shoulder to knee, thereby
eliminating potential kick
Figure 16
drag (see Figure 16)
Achieve a straight body position,
from shoulder to knee to eliminate
drag produced from drawing the knees
up and bending at the hip
33

--- Page 35 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 34
Technique Swim Workouts
Breaststroke with Dolphin – Breaststroke arm stroke with a dolphin
as you press out, and another as you sweep in, emphasizing the
rocking action and core use in the breaststroke
Breaststroke with Fists – Breaststroke arm stroke with fists, using
the forearms to press against the water to develop a stable, high
elbow position on outsweep, and to use the full paddle available on
the insweep.
Corners Drill – Regular
breaststroke, focusing on
achieving lift for the
breathing without pressing
down on the water, but
instead, by accelerating
from the outsweep into
the insweep, and holding
on to the water well
during the transition from
one to the other (see
Figure 17)
Figure 17
The path of the breaststroke arms Duck Feet – Stationary drill
underwater to practice the continual
ankle rotation needed to
keep the bottom of the
feet pressing against the
water at all stages of the
power phase of the kick
(see Figure 18)
Eyes on the Water –
Regular breaststroke where
you look down at the
water while inhaling, rather
than forward, in order to
Figure 18
continue the forward line
The path of the breaststoke kick
of the stroke
34

--- Page 36 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 26.01.2009 11:51 Uhr Seite 35
Breaststroke Drills
Flex/Point – Stationary drill where you
practice alternately flexing and pointing
your feet, first while watching your feet
and feeling the muscles required, then by
just feeling the actions, to achieve the
foot positions needed for a productive
breaststroke kick (see Figure 19)
Fold and Shrug – Regular breaststroke Figure 19
where you focus on increasing your Breaststroke kick
momentum into recovery by shrugging requires a full range of
your shoulders up as you breathe and foot positions ranging
finish the insweep, then rolling them down from fully flexed,
and forward into your quick recovery to fully pointed
Glide Length, Glide Speed – Regular breaststroke focusing on
starting the next stroke at the exact point where to maintain
momentum. Too short, and you do not benefit from the glide, too
long, and you lose momentum
Grow Your Recovery – First
stationary, then while swimming,
practice extending your stroke
length by straightening elbows,
then by bringing forearms closer
together, then by leaning forward
into your recovery. Finally, do all
at once
Half Breaststroke – Regular
breaststroke progressively reducing
the width and depth of the arm Figure 20
stroke so your hands and forearms Keep your arm stroke in front
stay within your rage of sight at all of your chest, with your hands
always within your range of
times, avoiding a dropped elbow
sight to produce less drag.
“chicken wing” position, in order to
Avoid letting your elbows to
get the most forward motion, with
drop back like chicken wings
the least drag (see Figure 20)
35

--- OCR from Page 36 Image 1 ---
|

POINT te

--- Page 37 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 36
Technique Swim Workouts
Hand Speed Drill – To practice no pauses in the arm stroke,
especially at the “drag point” that can occur at the transition from
insweep and recovery, do breaststroke arm stroke with flutter kick,
trying to accomplish a complete arm stroke (outsweep, insweep,
recovery) within the time it takes to do four flutter kick downbeats,
then hold in streamline for six kicks, and continue
Heads Up Breaststroke Arms with Flutter Kick – To be able to isolate
the path of the arm stroke, and watch it, while feeling lift in the
stroke, and still have the
benefit of kick momentum
Heads Up Breaststroke Kick –
Breaststroke kick with your
chin on the water’s surface,
first with hands leading, then
with head leading, to practice
kick productivity
Inhale at the High Point –
Regular breaststroke where
you achieve the breathing
position through a
combination of the lift from
the accelerating arm stroke,
and the rocking motion of the
stroke, rather than raising the
head independently, or
pressing down on the water
Figure 21
No Stars – Regular breast-
To minimize form drag in the
stroke maintaining the
breaststroke:
sequence “stroke then kick,”
first stroke (green silhouette),
to avoid producing drag where
then kick (yellow silhouette).
the stroke cancels out the
Avoid doing both at once
kick, and the kick cancels out
(orange silhouette)
the stroke, when the stroke
36

--- Page 38 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 37
Breaststroke Drills
and kick are done simultaneously. Stroke and then kick, and repeat
to achieve stroke timing that will produce the narrowest body
position during the power phases of the stroke, and the least drag
and width to the stroke (see Figure 21)
Rocking Drill – Astationary drill where you alternately rock your head
and chest upward as you bend your knees and raise your heels
toward your buttocks, then rock your head and chest downward as
you straighten your legs, to practice the basic rocking action of the
breaststroke
Sculling – Press out with thumbs down, press in with thumbs up, in
order to develop better “feel” for lateral motion of the breaststroke
arm stroke
Shoot to Streamline – Regular breaststroke where you focus on
eliminating any pause at the end of the insweep, and accelerating
through this “drag point,” using your momentum to get back to the
streamline position (see Figure 22)
Figure 22
Shoot through the Avoid getting stuck
“drag point” to streamline in the “drag point”
Streamline – A push off drill to feel the effect of drag and to practice
eliminating it, and progressively build an effective breaststroke home
base position
37

--- Page 39 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 38
Technique Swim Workouts
Stroke, Breathe, Kick, Glide Mantra – Regular breaststroke, while
saying each stroke element “stroke, breathe, kick, glide” in
sequence, as it happens, trying to make the stroke, breathe, kick
take up about as much time as the glide by itself
Stroke Up to Breathe, Kick Down to Glide – Regular breaststroke
focusing on using the leverage of the stroke by stroking and
breathing while rocking up, and kicking and gliding while rocking
down (see Figure 23)
Figure 23
Stroke up to breathe, kick down to glide
Tennis Ball Drill – Regular breaststroke holding a tennis ball under
your chin, to practice maintaining a stable head position for the most
productive forward motion
Thread the Needle – Regular breaststroke where after each stroke
you try to make a small hole in the water with your hands, then pass
through that same hole with your elbows, shoulders and head, chest,
hips, legs and feet, to feel the most streamlined stroke
Vertical Breaststroke Kick – Stationary breaststroke kick in deep
water from a vertical position, vigorously enough to keep the face
out of the water, to develop a productive kick
38

--- Page 40 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 39
Butterfly Drills
BUTTERFLY DRILLS
Advanced One Arm Butterfly – From a head leading position, do
butterfly with one arm only, while the other arm remains at your side,
to practice butterfly stroke rhythm, the pull and push of the arm
stroke, and focus on getting the chest down in a more sustainable
manner than the full stroke
Back Dolphin – First in head leading, then in hand leading position,
do dolphin while floating on your back, trying to feel that the
power comes from the core. Try to keep your face dry, by keeping
your head still
Body Wave – From a head leading float position, dip the head, then
chest and flow this action down to your hips and feet to create fluid
wave, and forward motion emphasizing starting the action high in
the body (see Figure 24)
Figure 24
Start your body wave by dipping your head and chest,
and let it flow down to your feet
Bowing – Stationary drill where you stand and bow forward, leaving
your hips stationary, and use your abdominal muscles to control the
action down and up, to simulate the constant high hips position of
the butterfly
39

--- Page 41 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:33 Uhr Seite 40
Technique Swim Workouts
Breaststroke with Dolphin – Breaststroke arm stroke with two
dolphins during each arm stroke, emphasizing the core use, constant
kick, and rhythm of the butterfly
Breathing Timing Drill – Stationary drill where you stand in waist
deep water, bend at the hips and lean forward so your face is in the
water. With arms extended forward, do an arm stroke, and stand as
your arms press towards the back. Breathe in the standing position.
Recover and bend forward again, and repeat. Exhale while your face
is in the water, inhale when your face clears the water
Chest Balance – Regular butterfly focusing on the point when your
chest is at its lowest point, and you feel as if you are riding downhill
and forward for an instant before you start your arm stroke and your
chest rises, giving leverage to the stroke that would not be present
from a flat body position (see Figure 25)
Figure 25
Balance on your chest as you reach for your catch
Coordination Checkpoint – Regular butterfly focusing on coordinating
three actions so they occur at exactly the same time: the round off
finish of the underwater arm stroke, the downward snap of the
second kick, and the inhale.
40

--- Page 42 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 41
Butterfly Drills
Deep to Shallow Dolphin –
Head leading dolphin, first
passing down and up
through six feet of water,
then three feet of water,
then just one foot of water,
to feel a fluid yet compact
dolphin (see Figure 26)
Dipping – Stationary drill,
where you float in a head
lead position and practice
dipping your chest rhyth-
mically, downward a few
inches into the water, then
returning to the starting Figure 26
position, and feeling how Exaggerate the wave of your dolphin,
doing so leads the rest then gradually reduce it until you
of your body to do follow feel a compact and productive
the action dolphin action
Dolphin Dives – In waist deep water, stand with arms at your sides,
then jump up, over, and down into the water, face first. Before your
reach the bottom, shift your weight back to a standing position, arms
still at your sides and repeat. Emphasizes the full body action of the
butterfly (see Figure 27)
Figure 27
Practice generating butterfly action from the core
41

--- Page 43 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 42
Technique Swim Workouts
Eyes on the Water Butterfly – Regular butterfly where you look down
at the water while inhaling, rather than forward, in order to continue
the forward line of the stroke
Flying Dolphin Dives – In waist deep water, stand with arms back as
if you have just released the water, take a breath and then swing
your arms around like the butterfly recovery as you jump up, over,
and down into the water, face first. Before your reach the bottom,
shift your weight back to a standing position, arms back and repeat.
Emphasizes the full body action of the butterfly, and the breathing
position
Freestyle with Dolphin – Regular freestyle arms with a dolphin
kick each time your hand strikes the water in front. Notice that the
other arm will be finishing the push phase of the arm stroke at the
same time. An excellent and sustainable drill for kick timing (see
Figure 4)
Hammer and Nail – Regular butterfly, breathing each stroke,
imagining that your forehead is a hammer and the water is a
nail. When your head returns to the water, strike the nail with
force. Avoid striking the water with your chin which will lead to
frontal drag
Left Arm, Right Arm, Both Arms – From a hand leading position, do
one butterfly stroke with your left arm only, then one with your right
arm, then a stroke with both arms. Start each new stroke when the
previous stroke returns to the starting point. To practice butterfly
stroke rhythm, and to bridge from drill to swim
No Kick Butterfly – Regular butterfly except consciously do not kick.
Keep your hips up and raise and dip your chest, and notice that the
kick flows down to your feet anyway. This drill emphasizes initiating
the kick from high in the body, rather than from the feet
42

--- Page 44 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 43
Butterfly Drills
No Pause Butterfly – Also known as “Grab and Go Butterfly”, where
you swim four to eight strokes of butterfly, with absolutely no
hesitation between the extension and the catch, the point
momentum is commonly lost. Then finish the length in easy freestyle
and repeat
One Arm Butterfly – From a hand leading position, do butterfly with
one arm only, while the other arm remains extended, to practice
butterfly stroke rhythm, the pull and push of the arm stroke, and
focus on keeping the hips up in a more sustainable manner than the
full stroke
Pinkies Up – Regular
butterfly focusing on
maintaining a consistent
“pinkie up” hand
position during recovery,
so the elbows do not
drag through the
water, but rather the
arms make an arch
over the water’s sur-
face, accomplishing a
Figure 28
“positive recovery” (see
Achieve a positive recovery.
Figure 28)
Swing your arms over the water with
your pinkies up so your elbows won’t
Pitch to Press – A drag through the water
stationary drill to
practice pressing back on the water, rather than down, and to
maintain constant pressure on the water by changing the pitch of
your hands throughout the path of the stroke. Stand in waist deep
water, and bend forward until your face is submerged. Start with your
hands extended in the butterfly entry position. Do a butterfly arm
stroke, pressing out and back, then sweeping in and back, then
again pressing out and back, and repeat
43

--- OCR from Page 44 Image 1 ---
SEF

--- Page 45 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 44
Technique Swim Workouts
Reaching to a “Y” – Regular butterfly focusing on a wide “Y” shaped
entry, leading with the thumbs in order to produce the most aligned
position to start the stroke, and the best catch position (see Figure 29)
Figure 29
Reach to a “Y” when entering Reaching to the middle with
the water to start the power collapsed elbows starts the
phase from a position power phase from a position
of strength of weakness
Recovery in Place – Stationary drill standing in chest deep water,
bringing the arms over the water first with the thumbs leading
(negative recovery), then again with the thumbs trailing (positive
recovery), and repeat to identify the most relaxed recovery arm
position, that completely clears the water
Round Off – Regular butterfly focusing on finishing the arm stroke by
pressing outward, like a “J” from the hips, for easy release from the
water, and a quick transition to recovery
The Flop – Regular butterfly focusing on initiating the recovery from
the shoulders, to achieve a relaxed forward reaching recovery.
Release the water, pinkies up, swing arms wide and around from the
44

--- Page 46 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 45
Butterfly Drills
shoulders, not the hands, until your arms are at shoulder level. Then,
roll your shoulders forward and redirect your hands to reach forward,
and as they do drop your chest into the water
Tracing Question Marks –
Regular butterfly tracing
the path of the butterfly
arms, wide to narrow, in
order to practice the front
to back sweep of the arm
stroke (see Figure 30)
Vertical Dolphin –
Stationary dolphin kick in
deep water from a verti-
cal position, vigorously
Figure 30
enough to keep the face
The path of the butterfly
out of the water, to
arm stroke underwater
develop a productive kick
Weight Shifting – In a head leading floating position, do a bowing
motion, hips constantly high, feeling how your weight shifts forward
as you bow down, and back as you bow up, creating leverage and
forward motion
45

--- Page 47 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 46
WWWWOOOORRRRKKKKOOOOUUUUTTTTSSSS
46

--- OCR from Page 47 Image 1 ---
a
S
:
=

--- Page 48 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 47
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
1
Workout
Focus Point: Core Tension for Better Body Position
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 4 x 25 “Head Lead Kick” w/10 SR – Chin down
Drill: 4 x 25 “Log Roll” w/10 SR – Chin down, roll from hips
Drill: 4 x 25 “Head Lead Kick” w/10 SR – Chin down
Drill: 4 x 25 “12 Kick Switch” w/10 SR – Chin down, switch
from hips
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 w/15 SR – 25 drill, 25 swim (Use drills above)
Swim: 4 x 100 Freestyle w/20 SR – Chin down, roll from hips,
feel core tension
50 Easy
Swim: 6 x 25 Freestyle – Fast/Easy w/ 15 SR – maintain core
tension on fast 25s
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,500
47

--- Page 49 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 48
Technique Swim Workouts
2
Workout
Focus Point: Swim Downhill
Warm up: 200
Drill: 200 “Head Lead Kick” – Chin down, balance on chest
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – Chin down, balance on chest
Drill: 200 “Log Roll” – Chin & chest down, roll from hips
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – Chin down, balance on chest,
roll from hips
50 Easy
Pull/Swim: 4 x 100 w/20 SR – Chin down, balance on chest, roll from
hips
Swim: 8 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/30 SR – Swim downhill
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,750
48

--- Page 50 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 49
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
3
Workout
Focus Point: Your Spine Is Your Axis
Warm up: 200
Kick: 6 x 25 flutter kick w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 50 “12 Kick Switch” w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 50 “6 Kick Switch” w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 50 “3 Kick Switch” w/10 SR
Drill/Swim: 4 x 75 – alternating 50 “6 Kick Switch”/25 Freestyle w/10 SR
50 Easy
Pull: 200 Freestyle – roll from hips, feel your axis
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – roll from hips, maintain your
axis
Cool down: 200
Total: 1,800
49

--- Page 51 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 50
Technique Swim Workouts
4
Workout
Focus Point: Find Your Line
Warm up: 200
Drill: 100 “12 Kick Switch” – Align reaching hand and shoulder
Drill: 100 “6 Kick Switch” – Align reaching hand, shoulder and
hip
Drill: 100 “3 Kick Switch” – Align reaching hand, shoulder, hip
and foot
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – establish your line from finger
to toe
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – maintain your line
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – feel your line
50 Easy
Pull: 200 – Roll from the hip, find your line
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/10 SR – maintain your line
Pull: 200 – Roll from the hip, feel your line
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,750
50

--- Page 52 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 12:27 Uhr Seite 51
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
5
Workout
Focus Point: Effective Kicking – Snap Down, Relax Up, Point Toes
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick – use pointed toes and floppy ankles
Kick: 4 x 25 w/10 SR – snap foot down, relax up
Kick: 4 x 25 w/10 SR – feel resistance on the top of your foot
Kick: 4 x 25 w/10 SR – use quick, narrow kick
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – snap foot down, relax up
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – feel resistance on the top of
your foot
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – use quick, narrow kick
50 Easy
Kick: 4 x 25 Fast Kick w/30 SR – keep heels below surface, but
make a splash
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/30 SR – keep heels below
surface, but make a splash
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700
51

--- Page 53 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 52
Technique Swim Workouts
6
Workout
Focus Point: Fish don’t have knees! Develop “Fluid Kicking”
Warm up: 200
Kick: 4 x 50 flutter kick w/ 10 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “Underwater Streamline Kick” w/15 SR
Kick: 4 x 25 flutter kick w/kickboard – no splash w/15 SR
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – with fluid kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Leg Kick” w/20 SR (25 left, 25 right)
Kick: 100 flutter kick (both legs)
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – with fluid kick
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/15 SR – fast fluid kick
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
52

--- Page 54 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 53
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
7
Workout
Focus Point: Kick With No Blank Spots
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick – alternating 25s w/splash and w/no
splash
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – minor sculling with hands – 30 sec. –
Keep head above water
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – cross arms over chest – 30 sec. –
Keep head above water
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – hands up – 30 sec. – Keep head
above water
Drill: 100 “3 Strokes, 3 Kicks”
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle – 6 kicks per arm cycle
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Leg Kick” w/20 SR (25 left, 25 right)
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – no blank spots when breathing
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,600 + 1.5 min. stationary drill
53

--- Page 55 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 54
Technique Swim Workouts
8
Workout
Focus Point: Swim Tall
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Swim: 4 x 25 Freestyle w/10 SR – count your strokes
Drill: 4 x 25 “Catch Up” w/10 SR – count your strokes, compare
Drill: 4 x 25 “3 Kick Switch” w/10 SR – count your strokes,
compare
Swim: 4 x 25 Freestyle w/10 SR – count your strokes, compare
Pull: 200 – use full extension each stroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – count your stokes
Pull: 200 – roll into and out of each stroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – count your stokes, compare
Swim: 4 x 25 Freestyle w/15 SR – swim tall
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,800
54

--- Page 56 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 55
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
9
Workout
Focus Point: Extend Entry From the Elbow
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – count strokes
Drill: 4 x 50 “Catch up Drill” w/10 SR – extend entry from
elbow
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – count strokes, compare
Swim: 5 x 100 Freestyle w/15 SR – roll from hips and extend
entry from elbow
50 Easy
Pull: 200 – roll from hips and extend entry from elbow
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850
55

--- Page 57 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 56
Technique Swim Workouts
10
Workout
Focus Point: Feel Your Paddle
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fist Drill” w/10 SR – use forearm as paddle
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – use palm and forearm as
paddle
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fist Drill” w/10 SR – maintain high elbows
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – maintain high elbows
Pull: 300 – use palm and forearm as paddle, maintain high
elbows
Swim: 8 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/30 SR – feel your paddle
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,800
56

--- Page 58 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 57
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
11
Workout
Focus Point: Point With Your Thumbs
Warm up: 200
Kick: 4 x 50 flutter kick w/10 SR
Swim: 6 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – count strokes
Drill: 6 x 50 “All Thumbs Drill” w/10 SR – feel your catch
Swim: 6 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – point with thumbs, count
strokes, compare
50 Easy
Pull: 200 – roll from hips, point with thumbs, feel your catch
Swim: 8 x 25 – roll from hips, point with thumbs, feel your catch
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850
57

--- Page 59 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 58
Technique Swim Workouts
12
Workout
Focus Point: Anchor Your Hand
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 100 “Sculling” – hold on to the water
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – extend from elbow
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – positive wrist position
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – pitch hand to enter thumb side
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – roll from hips
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – point with thumbs
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – catch from pinkie side
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – combine all the above to
anchor your hand
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
58

--- Page 60 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 59
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
13
Workout
Focus Point: Pull Then Push
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 3 x 100 “Pull/Push Freestyle” w/15 SR – pull from full
extension to shoulder
Drill: 3 x 100 “Pull/Push Freestyle” w/15 SR – push from
shoulder past hip
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – feel pull, then push
Pull: 200 – roll from hips, feel pull, then push
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – roll from hips, feel pull, and
push
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/15 SR – feel pull, then push in
each stroke
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
59

--- Page 61 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 60
Technique Swim Workouts
14
Workout
Focus Point: Stroke Front to Back
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 200 – your choice
Swim: 4 x 100 Freestyle w/15 SR – pull back, avoid pressing
down
Swim: 4 x 100 Freestyle w/15 SR – push back, avoid lifting up
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Arm Freestyle” – pull back, push back
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle – stroke front to back
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
60

--- Page 62 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 61
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
15
Workout
Focus Point: Benefit From the Pendulum Effect
Warm up: 200
Kick: 4 x 50 underwater streamline flutter kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “Shark Fin” w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – high elbow recovery, low
opposite hip
Drill: 4 x 50 “Shark Fin” w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – high elbow recovery, low
opposite hip
50 Easy
Drill: 100 “Pendulum” – high elbow recovery, low opposite hip
Pull: 200 – feel the pendulum rhythm
Swim: 3 x 100 Freestyle – high elbow recovery, low opposite
hip, pendulum rhythm
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
61

--- Page 63 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 62
Technique Swim Workouts
16
Workout
Focus Point: Relax Your Hand During Recovery
Warm up: 200
Kick: 4 x 25 Fast flutter kick w/10 SR
Drill: 100 – your choice
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – elbow higher than hand for
entire recovery
Drill: 4 x 50 “Floppy Hand Drill” w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – floppy hand, elbow higher
than hand
Drill: 4 x 50 “Shark Fin” w/10 SR – elbow high, fingers pointed
back towards feet
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – fingers pointed back towards
feet
50 Easy
Drill: 200 “Pendulum” – with floppy hand and fingers pointed
back toward feet
Pull: 200 – feel your floppy hand
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
62

--- Page 64 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 63
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
17
Workout
Focus Point: Rest During Recovery
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 200 – your choice
Drill: 100 “3 Strokes, 6 Kicks”
Drill: 100 “Shark Fin”
Pull: 200 – roll from hips, feel pendulum
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – roll from hips, rest recovering
arm
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 Freestyle w/15 SR – rest recovering arm
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/15 SR – rest recovering arm
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
63

--- Page 65 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 64
Technique Swim Workouts
18
Workout
Focus Point: Breathe From the Hip
Warm up: 200
Kick: 4 x 50 flutter kick w/10 SR
Drill: 200 “3 Strokes, 6 Kicks”
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – keep chin aligned with
breastbone
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – roll from hip to breathe
Drill: 4 x 50 “Dead Arm Freestyle” alternating 50s of left arm
stroking/ right arm stroking w/15 SR – chin aligned with
breastbone, roll hips to breathe
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – keep chin aligned with
breastbone
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – roll from hip to breathe
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – bi-lateral breathing
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
64

--- Page 66 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 65
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
19
Workout
Focus Point: Low Profile Breathing
Warm up: 200
Kick: 100 flutter kick
Drill: 100 – your choice
Kick: 100 flutter kick
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – feel cheek connected to water
when breathing
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – feel jawbone connected to
water when breathing
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – feel temple connected to
water when breathing
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – feel all the above connected
to water when breathing
Pull: 200 – press temple into the water when breathing
Drill: 4 x 25 “12 Kick Switch” w/10 SR – press temple into the
water when breathing
Drill: 4 x 25 “Dead Arm Freestyle” w/10 SR – alternating 25s of
left/right) – press temple
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – with low profile breathing
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
65

--- Page 67 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 66
Technique Swim Workouts
20
Workout
Focus Point: Develop a Weightless Reaching Hand
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 200 “12 Kick Switch” – find your line
Drill: 200 “6 Kick Switch” – feel your line
Drill: 200 “3 Kick Switch” – maintain your line
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – maintain line while breathing
50 Easy
Drill: 200 “Catch Up Drill” – feel line while breathing
Drill: 200 “Pendulum” – high recovering elbow, low opposite
hip while breathing
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – achieve the weightless hand
while breathing
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
66

--- Page 68 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 67
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
21
Workout
Focus Point: Skate on Your Hips
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Swim: 100 Freestyle – count strokes
Drill: 4 x 100 “Hip Skating” w/15 SR
Pull: 4 x 100 w/15 SR – skating on hips
Swim: 4 x 100 Freestyle w/15 SR – skating on hips
50 Easy
Swim: 100 Freestyle – skating on hips, count strokes, compare
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
67

--- Page 69 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 68
Technique Swim Workouts
22
Workout
Focus Point: Use Your Dominant Kick
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 flutter kick w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – no blank spots in kick
Drill: 4 x 25 “Heads Up Freestyle” w/15 SR – kick down as
hand strikes the water in front
Drill: 4 x 50 “Freestyle with Dolphin” w/10 SR – kick down as
hand strikes the water in front
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – kick down as hand strikes the
water in front
Drill: 4 x 50 “Freestyle with Dolphin” w/10 SR – faster tempo,
same coordination
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – faster tempo, same
coordination
50 Easy
Drill/Swim:12 x 25 w/30 SR – alternating 25s of Fast “Freestyle with
Dolphin”/Fast Freestyle
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
68

--- Page 70 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 69
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
23
Workout
Focus Point: Feel the Water
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 200 your choice
Drill: 4 x 50 “Sculling” w/10 SR – arms extended
Drill: 4 x 50 “Sculling” w/10 SR – arms at ribs
Drill: 4 x 50 “Sculling” w/10 SR – arms at hips
Swim: 3 x 100 Freestyle w/15 SR – feel on to water
50 Easy
Swim: 2 x 100 Freestyle w/15 SR – hold on to the water
50 Easy
Swim: 1 x 100 Fast Freestyle – maintain hold on the water
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
69

--- Page 71 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 70
Technique Swim Workouts
24
Workout
Focus Point:Feel Core Centered Swimming
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 flutter kick
Drill: 100 “Log Roll” – initiate roll from hips
Drill: 100 “Dead Arm Freestyle” – initiate roll from hips
Drill: 100 “Pendulum” – find line on each stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Freestyle w/10 SR – count strokes
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – roll into and out of each stroke
Pull: 200 – roll into and out of each stroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – hips and shoulders roll
together
Pull: 200 – hips and shoulders roll together
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – feel unified core action
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/10 SR – roll becomes a snap,
count strokes, compare
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
70

--- Page 72 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 71
Technique Workouts for Freestyle
25
Workout
Focus Point: Find Your Best Breathing Rhythm
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 flutter kick w/10 SR
Drill: 200 “Dead Arm Freestyle” – alternate lengths of left
arm/right arm
Swim: 200 Freestyle – breathe facing the same side of the pool
the whole time
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – breathe every 2 strokes
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – breathe every 3 strokes
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – breathe every 4 strokes
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – breathe every 5 strokes
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – your choice of breathing
pattern
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Freestyle w/30 SR – same breathing pattern,
roll into and out of each breath
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
71

--- Page 73 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 72
Technique Swim Workouts
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
26
Workout
Focus Point: Freestyle – Backstroke Contrast
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 alternating on front/on back w/10 SR – hands
leading
Drill: 4 x 50 alternating 50s of “Freestyle 12 Kick Switch”/
“Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/15 SR – roll from hips
Swim: 4 x 50 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke w/15 SR –
feel similar roll from hips
Drill: 4 x 50 alternating 50s of “Freestyle 6 Kick Switch”/
“Backstroke 6 Kick Switch” w/15 SR – swim tall
Swim: 4 x 50 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke w/15 SR –
feel similar alignment
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fist Drill” alternating 50s of front/back w/15 SR –
use forearm as paddle
Swim: 4 x 50 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke w/15 SR –
feel similar paddle
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700
72

--- Page 74 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 73
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
27
Workout
Focus Point: Float on Your Spine
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 alternating 25s on front/back
Drill: “Float on Spine” – 1 min.
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – head leading, float on spine
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – hands leading, float on spine
Drill: “Waterline Drill” – 1 min.
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – head leading, good waterline
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – hands leading, good waterline
Kick/Swim:8 x 50 Alternating 25s of kicking on back/backstroke
w/15 SR
Swim: 8 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – float on spine, good
waterline
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700 + 2 min. stationary drills
73

--- Page 75 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 74
Technique Swim Workouts
28
Workout
Focus Point: Feel the “Banana Position”
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: “Float on Spine” – 1 min. – contract abdominals as if
doing a crunch
Drill: “Waterline Drill” – 1 min. – contract abdominals as if
doing a crunch
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – head leading – contract
abdominals, achieve “banana position”
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – hands leading – contract
abdominals, achieve “banana position”
Kick/Swim:4 x 50 backstroke alternating 25s of kick and swim w/15
SR – contract abdominals
Kick/Swim:4 x 50 backstroke alternating 25s of kick and swim w/15
SR – achieve “banana position”
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – contract
abdominals, achieve “banana position”
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “12 Kick Switch”/Backstroke
w/15 SR – maintain “banana position”
Swim: 8 x 25 Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain contracted
abdominals and “banana position”
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,750 + 2 min. stationary drills
74

--- Page 76 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 26.01.2009 11:52 Uhr Seite 75
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
75

--- Page 77 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 76
Technique Swim Workouts
29
Workout
Focus Point: Achieve a Neutral Head and Relaxed Neck
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 alternating 25s on back/front
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/15 SR
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – head leading – achieve good
waterline, neutral head position
Kick: 4 x 25 on back w/10 SR – head leading – use water as a
pillow, achieve a relaxed neck
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/15 SR – achieve a
neutral head, relaxed neck
Swim: 8 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain a neutral head,
relaxed neck
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Backstroke/Freestyle w/15 SR –
achieve a neutral head, relaxed neck
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,750
76

--- Page 78 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 77
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
30
Workout
Focus Point: Feel an “Independent Head”
Warm up: 200
Kick: 4 x 50 your choice w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/15 SR – neutral
head position, relaxed neck
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain a neutral head
position, relaxed neck
Kick: 4 x 25 on back – head leading w/10 SR – cup on
forehead w/10 SR – neutral head position Kick: 4 x 25 on
back – head leading w/10 SR – cup on forehead w/10 SR
– relaxed neck
Drill: 4 x 25 “Cup on Forehead - Quarter Turn” w/15 SR –
neutral head position, relaxed neck
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “Cup on Forehead – Quarter Turn” w/15 SR –
achieve an “Independent Head”
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – achieve an “Independent
Head”
Drill: 4 x 50 “Cup on Forehead – Quarter Turn” w/15 SR –
achieve an “Independent Head”
Swim: 4 x 25 Backstroke w/15 SR – achieve an “Independent
Head”
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850
77

--- Page 79 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 78
Technique Swim Workouts
31
Workout
Focus Point: Getting Comfortable on Your Back
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/10 SR – focus on
alignment from reaching arm to feet
Swim: 4 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – focus on alignment from
reaching arm to feet
Kick: 4 x 25 backstroke kick w/10 SR – notice pool markers
such as flags, lane lines
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – use pool markers to gauge
distance from wall and direction
Kick: 4 x 25 backstroke kick w/10 SR – head leading – scan for
other landmarks such trees or light poles
Kick: 4 x 25 backstroke kick w/10 SR – arms leading – locate
same markers as above
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain visual contact with
markers
50 Easy
Kick: 4 x 25 backstroke kick – hands leading – lean slightly to
left for 12 kicks. Repeat to right.
Kick: 4 x 25 backstroke kick – hands leading – kick 24 kicks
then locate marker. Lean left or right to steer.
Swim: 100 Backstroke – use pool markers and landmarks.
Correct direction by leaning to steer.
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850
78

--- Page 80 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 79
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
79

--- Page 81 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 80
Technique Swim Workouts
32
Workout
Focus Point: Productive Kicking
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 4 x 25 “No Knees Streamline Kick” w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – keep knees underwater
Drill: 4 x 25 “Boiling Water Drill” w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – kick water upward
Drill: 4 x 25 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/10 SR – focus on
quick kicking
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – focus on quick kicking
50 Easy
Kick: 100 Backstroke Kick – knees underwater, kick water
upward, quick kicking
Swim: 100 Backstroke – knees underwater, kick water upward,
quick kicking
Swim: 8 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – focus on productive kicking
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850
80

--- Page 82 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 81
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
81

--- Page 83 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 82
Technique Swim Workouts
33
Workout
Focus Point: Develop Good Foot Position
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – 30 sec. – point toes, feel pressure of
water on top of foot
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – 30 sec. – without pointing toes,
notice it is difficult to keep your head up
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – 30 sec. – point toes, feel pressure of
water on top of foot
50 Easy
Kick: 100 Backstroke Kick – hands leading – press water
upward with top of foot
Kick: 100 Backstroke Kick – hands leading – relax foot as heel
drops down
Kick: 100 Backstroke Kick – hands leading – snap foot up, and
relaxing it down
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – snap foot up, relax it down.
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – 30 sec. – toes pointing outward
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – 30 sec. – toes pointing straight down
Drill: “Vertical Kicking” – 30 sec. – pigeon toe position
50 Easy
Drill: 8 x 25 “Pigeon Toed Kicking” w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – use pointed, pigeon toe
foot, snap foot up, relax it down
50 Easy
82

--- Page 84 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 83
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
Kick/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of Backstroke Kick/Backstroke
w/15 SR – use good foot position
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,800 + 3 min. stationary drills
83

--- Page 85 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 84
Technique Swim Workouts
34
Workout
Focus Point:Kick with Power
Warm up: 200
Kick: 100 your choice
Kick: 4 x 25 your choice – fast kick w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “No Knees Streamline Kick” w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “Pigeon Toed Kicking” w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “Boiling Water Drill” w/10 SR
Kick/Swim:8 x 50 kick on back/Backstroke – use good foot position
and productive kick
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “No Knees Streamline Kick” w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “Pigeon Toed Kicking” w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “Boiling Water Drill” w/10 SR
Kick/Swim:6 x 50 alternating 25s of Backstroke Kick/Backstroke –
use narrow, quick kicks
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – use narrow, quick kicks and
good foot position for kick power.
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
84

--- Page 86 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 85
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
35
Workout
Focus Point: Feeling the Path of the Stroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Swim: 200 Freestyle – focus on the straight arm beginning and
end of the stroke
Swim: 200 Freestyle – focus on the the bent elbow position in
the mid-pull
Drill: 4 x 25 “One Arm Rope Climb” w/10 SR
Swim: 100 Backstroke – focus on the straight arm beginning
and end of the stroke
Swim: 100 Backstroke – focus on the the bent elbow position in
the mid-pull
Swim: 200 Freestyle – focus on the
sweeping path of the stroke
Swim: 200 Freestyle – focus on
accelerating towards the end
of the stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Up and Over” w/10 SR
Swim: 100 Backstroke – focus on the
sweeping path of the stroke
Swim: 100 Backstroke – focus on
accelerating towards the end
of the stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR –
feel the path of the stroke
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
85

--- Page 87 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 86
Technique Swim Workouts
36
Workout
Focus Point: Pull, Then Push
Warm up: 200
Kick: 6 x 50 alternating 25s on front/on back
Drill: 100 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – focus on feeling the pull
Drill: 100 “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke” – focus on feeling
the pull
Swim: 200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke – focus on
feeling the pull
Drill: 100 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – focus on feeling the push
Drill: 100 “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke” – focus on feeling
the push
Swim: 200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke – focus on
feeling the push
Drill: 100 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – feel the transition from pull to
push
Drill: 100 “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke” – feel the transition
from pull to push
Swim: 200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke –- feel the
transition from pull to push
50 Easy
Swim: 6 x 25 Backstroke
w/10 SR – feel
pull, then push
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
86

--- Page 88 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 87
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
37
Workout
Focus Point:Hold On to Water
Warm up: 200
Kick: 6 x 50 – alternating 25s on front/on back
Swim: 200 – alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke – feel the
path of the stroke
Swim: 200 – alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke – feel pull,
then push
Swim: 200 Backstroke – feel the path of the stroke, and pull,
then push
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 w/10 SR – alternating “Fist Backstroke”/Backstroke
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 w/10 SR – alternating “One Arm Pull/Push
Backstroke”/Backstroke
Swim: 200 Backstroke – hold on to the water throughout the
stroke
50 Easy
Swim: 6 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – hold on to the water
throughout the stroke
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
87

--- Page 89 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 88
Technique Swim Workouts
38
Workout
Focus Point: Make a Clean Hand Entry
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 – alternating 50s on front/on back
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – identify what part of your
hand enters the water first
Drill: 200 “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke” – enter the water
with your pinkie
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – enter the water with your
pinkie
50 Easy
Drill: 200 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – slice the water with
your pinkie at entry
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – slice the water with your
pinkie at entry
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – making a clean hand entry
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
88

--- Page 90 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 89
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
39
Workout
Focus Point: Catch Deep
Warm up: 200
Kick: 6 x 25 on back w/10 SR
Kick: 6 x 25 on front w/10 SR
Drill: 200 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – allow reaching hand
to descend about 12 inches under the surface
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – allow reaching hand to
descend 12 inches under the surface
Drill: 200 “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke” – achieve catch
about 12 inches under the surface
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – achieve catch about 12
inches under the surface
Drill: 200 “Up and Over” – pull upward after your deep catch
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – pull upward after your deep
catch
Drill/Swim:100 alternating 25s of “Corkscrew”/Backstroke – feel a
deep catch each stroke on back
Swim: 4 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – catch deep
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
89

--- Page 91 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 90
Technique Swim Workouts
40
Workout
Focus Point: Entry Alignment
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill: 100 “Clock Arms” – hands enter at 12:00
Drill: 100 “Clock Arms” – hands enter at 11:00/1:00
Drill: 100 “Clock Arms” – hands enter at 10:00/2:00
Swim: 200 Backstroke – hands enter between 11:00 /1:00 –
10:00/2:00
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – align entering hand
with head
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – align entering hand
with shoulder
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – align entering hand
outside shoulder
Swim: 200 Backstroke – hands enter aligned with or outside
shoulder
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/10 SR – place hands precisely
beyond 12:00 at entry
Swim: 4 x 25 Freestyle w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/10 SR – place hands precisely at
shoulder width or wider at entry
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
90

--- Page 92 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 91
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
41
Workout
Focus Point: Elbows and Alignment
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 – alternating 50s on front/on back
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – count strokes
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/15 SR – firm elbow
throughout recovery
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – firm elbow throughout
recovery, count strokes, compare
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – count strokes
Drill: 4 x 50 “Locked Elbow Recovery Drill” w/15 SR – locked
elbow throughout recovery
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – locked elbow throughout
recovery, count strokes, compare
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
91

--- OCR from Page 92 Image 1 ---
ee ae

--- Page 93 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 92
Technique Swim Workouts
42
Workout
Focus Point: Relaxing Your Hand During Recovery
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 on front
Kick: 200 on back
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – roll from core
Swim: 200 Backstroke – roll from core
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – roll from core, relax
recovering hand
Swim: 200 Backstroke – roll from core, relax recovering hand
Drill: 100 “Two-Step Recovery” – stabilize from core
Swim: 200 Backstroke – stabilize from core
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – stabilize from core,
relax recovering hand
Swim: 200 Backstroke – stabilize from core, relax recovering
hand
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Backstroke w/15 SR – recover with relaxed
hands
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
92

--- Page 94 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 93
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
43
Workout
Focus Point: Avoid a “Collapsed Wrist”
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 100 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – switch from core,
recovering with shoulders aligned
Drill: 100 “Locked Elbow Drill” – generate recovery from core,
keep elbows locked
Swim: 100 Backstroke – shoulders aligned, elbows locked
Swim: 100 Backstroke – shoulders aligned, elbows locked,
positive wrist position
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – count strokes
Drill: 4 x 50 “Puppy Ears” w/15 SR – positive wrist position
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – positive wrist position –
count strokes, compare
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke” w/15 SR – pitch
hand outward at entry
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR - pitch hand outward at entry
– count strokes, compare
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Backstroke w/15 SR – avoid a “collapsed wrist”
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
93

--- Page 95 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 94
Technique Swim Workouts
44
Workout
Focus Point: Opposition
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 on back w/10 SR – alternating 25s fast/medium
Drill: 200 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – observe relationship
between arms
Swim: 200 Backstroke – observe relationship between arms
Drill: 200 “Opposition Freeze Frame” – notice opposite arm
positions
Swim: 200 Backstroke – notice opposite arm positions
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – notice opposition at start
and end of stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain opposition
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – notice opposition in middle
of stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain opposition
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
94

--- Page 96 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 95
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
45
Workout
Focus Point: Using Core Leverage
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 200 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” – feel core stability on
each side
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch”/
Backstroke – feel core stability on each side
Drill: 200 “Backstroke 3 Stroke Switch” – feel switch from core
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “Backstroke 3 Kick Switch”/
Backstroke – feel switch from core
Drill: 200 “One Arm Pull/Push” – roll into and out of each stroke
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “One Arm Pull/Push Backstroke”/
Backstroke – roll into and out of each stroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – use core to stabilize and roll
into and out of each stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Backstroke w/10 SR – maintain core leverage
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
95

--- Page 97 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 96
Technique Swim Workouts
46
Workout
Focus Point: Breathing Rhythms
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – your choice
Drill: 4 x 25 “Breathing Pocket” w/10 SR
Swim: 6 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – find breathing pocket in
each stroke cycle
Drill: 4 x 25 “Rhythmic Breathing” w/10 SR
Swim: 6 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – establish rhythmic breathing
Swim: 25 Backstroke – 10 SR
Swim: 50 Backstroke – 15 SR
Swim: 75 Backstroke – 20 SR
Swim: 100 Backstroke – 25 SR
Swim: 200 Backstroke
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke w/10 SR –
use rhythmic breathing
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Backstroke w/15 SR – maintain rhythmic
breathing
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
96

--- Page 98 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 97
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
47
Workout
Focus Point: Coordinated Backstroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – alternating 25s on front/on back
Swim: 50 Backstroke – focus on spine axis
Swim: 50 Backstroke – focus on productive kicking
Swim: 50 Backstroke – focus on good catch
Swim: 50 Backstroke – focus on pull and push
Swim: 50 Backstroke – focus on relaxed, aligned recovery
Swim: 50 Backstroke – focus on rolling from the core
Swim: 100 Backstroke – try to incorporate all of the above
Drill: 200 “Armpit Lift”
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “Armpit Lift”/Backstroke
Swim: 100 Backstroke – notice how lifting armpit affects
stroking arm
Drill: 200 “Roll/Pull, Roll/Push”
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “Roll/Pull, Roll/Push”/Backstroke
Swim: 100 Backstroke – notice actions on one side of the stroke
balance the other side
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
97

--- Page 99 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 98
Technique Swim Workouts
48
Workout
Focus Point: Backstroke Balance
Warm up: 200
Kick: 100 on back
Kick: 100 on front
Kick: 100 on back
Drill: 100 “Cup on Forehead – Quarter Turn” – rolling from core
Drill: 100 “Cup on Forehead – Quarter Turn” – rolling from core,
establish an “independent head”
Swim: 200 Backstroke – rolling from core, maintain an
“independent head”
Drill: 100 “Backstroke Balance Drill with Cup” – rolling from
core, “independent head”
Drill: 100 “Backstroke Balance Drill with Cup” – rolling from
core, “independent head”
Swim: 200 Backstroke – rolling from core, “independent head”,
balanced stroke
50 Easy
Swim: 10 x 50 alternating 50s of Freestyle/Backstroke w/ 15 SR –
maintain stroke balance
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
98

--- Page 100 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 99
Technique Workouts for Backstroke
49
Workout
Focus Point: Constant Motion
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – your choice
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch” w/15 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – no blank spots in kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “Backstroke 3 Stroke Switch” w/15 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – no flat spots in roll
Drill: 4 x 50 “Roll, Pull/Roll, Push” w/15 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/15 SR – no still spots in stroke
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 Fast Backstroke w/15 SR – constant kick, roll,
motion
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
99

--- Page 101 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 100
Technique Swim Workouts
50
Workout
Focus Point: Freestyle/Backstroke Stroke Count Comparison
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 alternating 25s on front/on back
Drill: 200 “Freestyle 12 Kick Switch”
Drill: 200 “Backstroke 12 Kick Switch”
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “Freestyle 12 Kick Switch”/
“Backstroke 12 Kick Switch”
Swim: 200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – get average stroke count per 25
Swim: 4 x 50 Backstroke w/10 SR – get average stroke count
per 25, compare
Drill: 4 x 25 “Cork Screw” w/15 SR – feel one stroke freestyle
and one stroke backstroke
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Backstroke w/15 SR –
strive for same stroke count
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
100

--- Page 102 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 101
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
5Tec1hnique Workouts for Breaststroke
Workout
Focus Point: Breaststroke’s “Home Base” Position
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: “Streamline” – 5 minutes
Drill: 200 “3 Kick Breaststroke” – maintain streamline upper
body throughout 3 kick phase
Drill: 200 “2 Kick Breaststroke” – return to full streamline
position after each kick
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – strike streamline position after each kick
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke Arms with Flutter Kick” – return to full
streamline position after each arm stroke
Drill: 200 “Heads Up Breaststroke with Flutter Kick” – hold
streamline position after
each arm stroke
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – strike
streamline position after
each kick
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR
– return to home base for
3 seconds after each stroke
cycle
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR
– return to home base for
2 seconds after each stroke
cycle
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700 + 5 min. stationary
drills
101

--- Page 103 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 102
Technique Swim Workouts
52
Workout
Focus Point: Breaststroke Balance Point
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: “Rocking Drill” – 1 min. – find the “chest high” position
at the beginning of each kick
Drill: “Rocking Drill” – 1 min. – find the “chest low” position at
the end of each kick
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – find the high and low chest positions
in each stroke
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – breathe above hip line
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – streamline below hip line
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – breathe up and streamline down in
each stroke
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – use hips to balance upper
body actions
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – use hips to balance kick
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – feel your hips as the balance point of
the stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – holding your balance point
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,800 + 2 min.
stationary
drills
102

--- Page 104 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 103
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
53
Workout
Focus Point: Breaststroke Foot Position and Ankle Rotation
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: “Flex/Point” – 2 minutes
Drill: “Duck Feet” – 5 minutes
Kick: 4 x 25 Breaststroke kick w/10 SR – focus on flexing feet
Kick: 4 x 25 Breaststroke kick w/10 SR – focus on holding on
to water with sole of feet
Kick: 4 x 25 Breaststroke kick w/10 SR – focus on ankle
rotation throughout kick
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 minute – focus on flexing
feet
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 minute – focus on
holding on to water with sole of feet
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 minute – focus on ankle
rotation throughout kick
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – focus on flexing feet
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – focus on holding on to
water with sole of feet
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke
w/15 SR – focus
on ankle rotation
throughout kick
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,500 + 10 min.
stationary drills
103

--- Page 105 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 104
Technique Swim Workouts
54
Workout
Focus Point: Circle Feet Around Knees
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 min. – position knees
shoulder width apart
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 min. – knees closer
together than feet
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – knees shoulder width
apart, closer together than feet
Drill: 50 “Breaststroke Kick on Back” – keep knees shoulder
width apart
Drill: 50 “Breaststroke Kick on Back” – keep feet outside knees
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – knees shoulder width
apart, feet outside knees
Drill: 50 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” – arms leading – knees
stay shoulder width apart
Drill: 50 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” – head leading – sweep
wide to narrow with feet
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – knees shoulder width
apart, sweep wide to narrow with feet
Drill: 50 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” – arms leading – stable
knees
Drill: 50 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” – head leading – circle
feet around knees
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – stable knees, circle feet
around knees
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – stable knees, shoulder
width apart, circle feet around knees
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700 + 2 min. stationary drills
104

--- Page 106 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 105
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
105

--- Page 107 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 106
Technique Swim Workouts
55
Workout
Focus Point: Minimize Bend at Hips
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke Kick on Back” – draw heel ups behind
you
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke Kick on Back” with kickboard over
knees – keep knees underwater
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – minimal bend at hips
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 min. – achieve straight
line from shoulder to knee
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 1 min. – avoid bobbing
bending at the hip
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – minimal bend at hips
Drill: 200 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick – head leading – feel
heels with finger tips
Drill: 200 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick – head leading – avoid
drag of folding at the hip
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – minimal bend at hips
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900 + 2 min. stationary drills
106

--- Page 108 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 107
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
56
Workout
Focus Point: Keep Heels Underwater
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 8 x 50 alternating 50s of Freestyle/Breaststroke w/15 SR
Drill: 4 x 25 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” w/10 SR – listen for
absolutely quiet kick
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – kick should never break
the surface
Drill: 4 x 25 “3 Kick Breaststroke” w/10 SR – avoid snagging
air with feet
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – keep heels underwater
Drill: “Rocking Drill” – 1 min – rock chest up to increase water
over raised heels
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – incorporate rocking motion to keep
heels underwater
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Breaststroke – keep heels underwater by
rocking
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850 + 1 min.
stationary
drills
107

--- Page 109 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 108
Technique Swim Workouts
57
Workout
Focus Point: Accelerate Your Kick
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 30 seconds – use slow kick
Drill: “Vertical Breaststroke Kick” – 30 seconds – use fast kick
– notice face stays above water better
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – use fast kick
Drill: 100 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” – arms leading – each
kick finishes faster than it starts
Drill: 100 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” – head leading – each
kick finishes faster than it starts
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – finish each kick fast
Drill: 100 “3 Kick Breaststroke” – accelerate your kick
Drill: 100 “2 Kick Breaststroke” – accelerate your kick
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – clap feet together at end
of kick
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Fast Breaststroke/Easy
Breaststroke w/15 SR – accelerate your kick
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900 + 1 min. stationary drills
108

--- Page 110 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 109
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
109

--- Page 111 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 110
Technique Swim Workouts
58
Workout
Focus Point: Keep Arm Stroke Small and Forward
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “Sculling” w/15 SR – hands stay forward
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – incorporate sculling motion
Drill: 4 x 50 “Half Stroke Breaststroke” w/15 SR – watch hands
throughout stroke
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – keep hands within visual range
Drill: 4 x 50 “Hand Speed Drill” w/15 SR – small strokes make
faster strokes
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – keep arm stroke small and forward
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR –- watch hands, keep arm
stroke small and forward
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
110

--- Page 112 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 111
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
59
Workout
Focus Point: No Chicken Wings!
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “Sculling” w/15 SR – feel outsweep and insweep
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – keep elbows high until
end of insweep
Drill: 4 x 25 “Breaststroke with Fists” w/10 SR – elbows follow
hands inward at insweep
Drill/Swim:200 – alternating 25s of “Breaststroke with Fists”/
Breaststroke – hands, then elbows
Drill: 8 x 25 “Half Stroke Breaststroke” w/10 SR – keep elbows
in front of rib cage
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – keep elbows from slipping
behind rib cage
Drill/Swim:200 – alternating 25s of “Hand Speed Drill”/Breaststroke
– fold elbows in front of rib cage
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – no chicken wings!
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
111

--- Page 113 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 112
Technique Swim Workouts
60
Workout
Focus Point: Hold On to the Water Through the Corners
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 200 “Sculling” – hold on to water through outsweep and
insweep
Swim: 8 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – feel the corners
Drill: 8 x 50 “Corners Drill” w/15 SR – don’t let go of the water
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – hold on to the water in both directions
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – feel the corners
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – hold on to the water
through the corners
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
112

--- Page 114 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 113
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
61
Workout
Focus Point: Getting Through the “Drag Point”
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 200 Breaststroke w/15 SR – notice any halt in arm stroke
at end of insweep
Drill: 8 x 25 “Heads Up Breaststroke” w/10 SR – identify the
halt at the “drag point”
Drill: 4 x 50 “Breaststroke with Fists” w/15 SR – feel the halt at
the “drag point”
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – feel the effect of the “drag point”
Drill: 4 x 50 “Hand Speed Drill” w/15 SR – eliminate halt at
end of insweep
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – get through the “drag point” quickly
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – get through the “drag point”
Swim: 4 x 25 alternating 25s of Fast Breaststroke/Easy Freestyle
w/15 SR – eliminate “the drag point”
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
113

--- Page 115 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 114
Technique Swim Workouts
62
Workout
Focus Point: Get Back to “Home Base”
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – feel the “home base”
starting point of each stroke
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – feel the “home base”
ending point of each stroke
Drill: 200 “Heads Up Breaststroke” – watch hands touch
“home base” after each stroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – start each new stroke from
“home base”
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – strike home base between each stroke
Drill: 2 x 100 “Shoot to Streamline” w/15 SR – shoot to “home
base”
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/15 SR – get back to “home base”
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
114

--- Page 116 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 115
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
63
Workout
Focus Point:Lean into Your Recovery
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 – other than breaststroke kick w/10 SR
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – focus on achieving a productive
streamline
Drill: 4 x 25 “Rocking Drill” w/10 SR – shift weight forward
approaching streamline
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – streamline downhill after recovery
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – streamline downhill, balance on your
chest
Drill: 4 x 25 “Grow Your Recovery” w/10 SR – lean into your
recovery
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – shift weight forward into recovery
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – use narrow recovery
Drill: 4 x 25 “Shoot to Streamline” w/10 SR – narrow, quick
recovery
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – narrow, quick recovery to downhill
streamline
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
115

--- Page 117 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 116
Technique Swim Workouts
64
Workout
Focus Point: Unified Arm Stroke and Breathing Action
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “Corners Drill” w/10 SR – feel lift at the corners
Drill: 4 x 50 “Corners Drill” w/10 SR – feel face rise during
insweep
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – inhale as face rises during insweep
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fold and Shrug” w/10 SR – feel weight shifting
forward after inhale
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fold and Shrug” w/10 SR – feel face return to
water between extended arms
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – exhale in streamline position
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 Fast Breaststroke w/15 SR – feel unified arm
stroke and breathing action
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
116

--- Page 118 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 117
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
65
Workout
Focus Point: Find the Natural High Point
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: “Rocking Drill” – 1 min. – feel the high point of the head
Drill: “Rocking Drill” – 1 min. – feel the high point of the heels
Swim: 8 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – feel the natural high point
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – feel the high point of the
head and heels
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – inhale at the high point of
head and heels
Swim: 7 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – feel the natural high point
Drill: 100 “Inhale at the High Point” – inhale at the high point
of head and heels
Drill: 100 “Inhale at the High Point” – inhale before recovery
and kick
Swim: 6 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – feel the natural high point
before recovery and kick
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
117

--- Page 119 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 118
Technique Swim Workouts
66
Workout
Focus Point: Look at the Water While Inhaling
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – count strokes
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – look forward, count strokes, compare
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – look down at the water, count
strokes, compare
Drill: 4 x 50 “Eyes on the Water” w/15 SR – look down at the
water
Drill: 4 x 50 “Corners Drill” w/15 SR – watch hands at corners
Drill: 4 x 50 “Shoot to Streamline” w/15 SR – watch hands
transition to recovery
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fold and Shrug” w/15 SR – look at the water
while inhaling
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – count strokes, compare
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – eyes on the water
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
118

--- Page 120 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 119
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
67
Workout
Focus Point: No Nodding!
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 w/10 SR – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – shift weight forward from chest
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – accelerate hands on insweep
Swim: 50 Breaststroke – inhale at the natural high point
Drill/Swim:12 x 25 alternating 25s of “Tennis Ball Drill”/Breaststroke
– don’t drop ball while inhaling
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – look down at the water throughout
stroke
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – use rocking motion from core
Swim: 50 Breaststroke – lean into recovery with chest
Drill/Swim:12 x 25 alternating 25s of “Tennis Ball Drill”/Breaststroke
– no nodding
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
119

--- Page 121 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 120
Technique Swim Workouts
68
Workout
Focus Point: Power From the Core
Warm up: 200
Kick: 12 x 25 alternating 25s of fast/easy w/10 SR – other than
breaststroke kick
Drill: 100 “Corners Drill” – feel lift
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – exaggerate the lift
Drill/Swim:100 alternating 25s of “Breaststroke with Dolphin”/
Breaststroke – achieve lift
Drill: 100 “Rocking Drill” – feel high and low chest positions
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – exaggerate high and
low chest positions
Drill/Swim:100 alternating 25s of “Breaststroke with Dolphin”/
Breaststroke – achieve high and low chest positions
Drill: 100 “Fold and Shrug” – feel weight shift forward
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – exaggerate weight
shifting forward
Drill/Swim:100 alternating 25s of “Breaststroke with Dolphin”/
Breaststroke – achieve forward shift of weight
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – feel the downhill streamline
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – exaggerate the
downhill streamline
Drill/Swim:100 alternating 25s of “Breaststroke with Dolphin”/
Breaststroke – achieve the downhill streamline
Swim: 8 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – achieve power from the core
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
120

--- Page 122 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 121
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
121

--- Page 123 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 122
Technique Swim Workouts
69
Workout
Focus Point: Overcoming Flat Breaststroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – feel rocking motion
Drill/Swim:6 x 50 alternating “Breaststroke with Dolphin”/Breast-
stroke w/15 SR – feel rocking motion
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – feel rocking motion
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke Alternating Dolphin & Breaststroke
Kick” – use rocking motion
Drill/Swim:6 x 50 alternating “Breaststroke Alternating Dolphin &
Breaststroke Kick”/Breaststroke w/15 SR – use rocking
motion
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – use rocking motion
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
122

--- Page 124 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 123
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
70
Workout
Focus Point: Breaststroke Sequence
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – focus on starting the arm stroke from
streamline
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – focus on starting the inhale at the
corners
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – focus on starting the kick when the
arms are in mid recovery
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – focus on achieving complete
streamline after the kick
Drill: 8 x 50 “Stroke, Breathe, Kick, Glide Mantra”
Swim: 8 x 50 Breaststroke w/10 SR – maintain the sequence of
stroke elements
50 Easy
Swim: 6 x 25 alternating 25s of Fast Breaststroke/Easy
Breaststroke – maintain the sequence
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
123

--- Page 125 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 124
Technique Swim Workouts
71
Workout
Focus Point: Coordinated Breaststroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 100 “Corners Drill” – find the high point in the stroke
Drill: 100 “Inhale at the High Point” – inhale the high point of
the stroke
Swim: 8 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – stroke up to breathe
Drill: 100 “Breaststroke Alternating Dolphin & Breaststroke
Kick” – kick and achieve downhill streamline
Drill: 100 “Shoot to Streamline” – kick follows arms to
streamline
Swim: 8 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – kick down to streamline
Drill: 4 x 25 “Stroke Up to Breathe, Kick Down to Glide” w/10
SR – feel coordination
Swim: 4 x 25 Fast Breaststroke w/15 SR – stroke up to breathe,
kick down to glide
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
124

--- Page 126 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 125
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
72
Workout
Focus Point: Avoiding Drag
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 8 x 25 “Hand Speed Drill” w/10 SR – no halt, get back to
home base
Drill: 4 x 50 “Half Stroke Breaststroke” w/15 SR – keep stroke
small, quick and forward
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – avoid drag in arm stroke from halting
and over-size stroke
Drill: 8 x 25 “Breaststroke Kick on Back” w/10 SR – straight
line from knees to shoulders
Drill: 4 x 50 “Heads Up Breaststroke Kick” w/15 SR – knees
closer together than heels
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – avoid drag in kick from folded hips
and unstable knee position
Drill: 8 x 25 “Eyes on the Water” w/10 SR – look down at the
water
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fold and Shrug” w/15 SR – shift weight forward
into streamline
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – avoid drag in breathing from looking
forward and stopping momentum
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
125

--- Page 127 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 126
Technique Swim Workouts
73
Workout
Focus Point: Breaststroke Tempo
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 w/10 SR – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 4 x 50 “No Stars” – think arms, then legs
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – increase tempo, think arms, then legs
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – increase tempo, think arms, then legs
Swim: 50 Breaststroke – increase tempo, think arms, then legs
Swim: 25 Breaststroke – increase tempo, think arms, then legs
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 50 “Glide Length, Glide Speed” w/10 SR
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – think arms, then legs
Swim: 100 Breaststroke – increase tempo, maintain arms, then legs
Swim: 50 Breaststroke – increase tempo, maintain arms, then legs
Swim: 25 Breaststroke – increase tempo, maintain arms, then legs
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Fast Breaststroke/Freestyle w/15
SR – maintain arms, then legs
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,950
126

--- Page 128 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 127
Technique Workouts for Breaststroke
74
Workout
Focus Point: Maximizing Power, Minimizing Drag
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – feel rocking motion
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke Alternating Dolphin and Breaststroke
Kick” – feel power from the core
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – achieve rocking motion
and generate power from the core
Drill: 200 “No Stars” – arms, then legs
Drill: 200 “Half Stroke Breaststroke” – quick, forward arm stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – achieve good timing to
avoid drag
Drill: 200 “Shoot to Streamline” – get through the drag point
back to home base
Drill: 200 “Thread the Needle” – aim your power forward
Swim: 4 x 25 Breaststroke w/10 SR – minimize drag and
maximize power
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
127

--- Page 129 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 128
Technique Swim Workouts
75
Workout
Focus Point: Finding Your Stroke Count
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 – other than breaststroke kick
Swim: 200 Freestyle – count strokes
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – count strokes (aim for half your
freestyle count)
Swim: 200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Breaststroke – count
strokes
Drill: 4 x 50 “Fist Freestyle” w/15 SR
Drill: 4 x 50 “Breaststroke with Fists” w/15 SR
Swim: 200 Freestyle – count strokes
Swim: 200 Breaststroke – count strokes
Swim: 200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Breaststroke – count
strokes (aim for half your freestyle count)
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
128

--- Page 130 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 129
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
76
Workout
Focus Point: Butterfly Body Motion
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill: Bowing – 2 min.
Drill: 4 x 25 “Weight Shifting” – head leading w/15 SR –
horizontal bowing
Drill: 4 x 25 “Weight Shifting” – head leading w/15 SR – hips
remain high
Drill: 4 x 25 “Weight Shifting” – head leading w/15 SR – use
abdominals to shift weight
Drill: 4 x 50 “Body Wave” – head leading w/15 SR – head to hips
Drill: 4 x 50 “Body Wave” – hands leading w/15 SR – hands to
hips
Drill: 4 x 50 “Body Wave” – head leading w/15 SR – head to
hips to feet
Drill: 4 x 50 “Body Wave” – hands leading w/15 SR – hands to
hips to feet
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700 + 2 min. stationary drills
129

--- Page 131 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 130
Technique Swim Workouts
77
Workout
Focus Point: Maintain High Hips
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 200 “Dipping” – maintain high hips
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” head leading – roll the wave through
hips
Drill: 8 x 25 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” w/10 SR – maintain
high hips
Drill: 200 “Dipping” – low chest, high hips
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” hands leading – roll the wave through
hips
Drill: 8 x 25 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” w/10 SR – balance
from hips
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,700
130

--- Page 132 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 131
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
78
Workout
Focus Point: The Kick Action Ends at the Feet
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill: 8 x 25 “Dipping” w/10 SR – chest begins action
Drill: 4 x 50 “Body Wave” head leading w/15 SR – roll the
wave chest to hips
Drill: 200 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” – roll the wave through
the hips
Drill: 4 x 50 “Body Wave” head leading w/15 SR – roll the
wave chest to hips to the feet
Drill: 8 x 25 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” w/10 SR – feet follow
the head
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – kick action ends at the
feet
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,800
131

--- Page 133 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 132
Technique Swim Workouts
79
Workout
Focus Point:Fluid Dolphin Action
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 8 x 25 “Dipping” w/10 SR – rhythmic dip
Drill: 8 x 50 “Body Wave” w/15 SR – rhythmic wave
Drill: 8 x 50 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” w/15 SR – rhythmic wave
Drill: “Vertical Dolphin” – 30 sec. – keep head above water
Drill: “Vertical Dolphin” – 30 sec. – flip each kick down to the
feet
Drill: “Vertical Dolphin” – 30 sec. – rhythmic wave
Drill: 4 x 50 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” w/15 SR – fluid,
rhythmic wave
Kick: 4 x 25 Dolphin - hands leading w/10 SR – fluid dolphin
action
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,800 + 1.5 min. stationary drills
132

--- Page 134 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 133
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
80
Workout
Focus Point: Feeling Full Body Dolphin
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill: 4 x 25 “Weight Shifting” w/10 SR – use your abdominals
Drill: 8 x 25 “Body Wave” w/10 SR – roll the action down from
chest to feet
Drill: 4 x 50 “Dolphin Dives” – feel your body and legs follow
your head
Drill: 200 “Breaststroke with Dolphin” – body and legs follow
your head
Drill: 4 x 50 “Dolphin Dives” – faster tempo
Drill: 8 x 25 “Body Wave” w/10 SR – feel full body dolphin
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
133

--- Page 135 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 134
Technique Swim Workouts
81
Workout
Focus Point: Kick Water Not Air
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” – rhythmic action
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” with fins – low knee bend, keep feet
connected to water
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” – low knee bend, keep feet connected
to water
Drill: 200 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” – rhythmic action
Drill: 200 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” with fins – keep fins
connected to water
Drill: 200 “Deep to Shallow Dolphin” – keep feet connected to
water
Kick: 8 x 25 dolphin – hands leading w/10 SR – kick water not air
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
134

--- Page 136 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 135
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
82
Workout
Focus Point: Snapping Your Kick Downward
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” – whiplike action from chest to feet
Kick: 200 dolphin kick – hands leading – whiplike action from
hands to feet
Drill: “Vertical Dolphin” – 1 min. – snap forward, relax back
Drill: 4 x 25 “Back Dolphin” w/10 SR – snap up, relax down
Kick: 200 dolphin kick – snap down, relax up
Drill: 200 “Body Wave” – kick snaps down when chest is high
Kick: 200 dolphin kick – avoid raising heels and head at the
same time
Drill: “Vertical Dolphin” – 1 min. – snap forward, relax back
Drill: 4 x 25 “Back Dolphin” w/10 SR – snap up, relax down
Kick: 200 dolphin kick – snap down, relax up
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900 + 2 min. stationary drills
135

--- Page 137 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 136
Technique Swim Workouts
83
Workout
Focus Point: Think Double Arm Freestyle
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 your choice w/10 SR
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – focus on the three
dimensional sweep of the arm stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” – w/15 SR – trace wide
to narrow question marks
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” – w/15 SR – trace deep
to shallow question marks
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – focus on reaching forward
before starting stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” – w/15 SR – reach
forward before each stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” – w/15 SR – reach
forward into each stroke
Swim: 4 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – focus on the front to back
direction of the arm stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” – w/15 SR – avoid
pressing down to start stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” – w/15 SR – stroke from
front to back
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
136

--- Page 138 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 137
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
84
Workout
Focus Point: Pull, Then Push
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 alternating 50s of flutter kick/dolphin
Drill: 200 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – feel pull
Drill: 200 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – feel push
Drill: 4 x 25 “One Arm Fly” w/15 SR – feel pull
Drill: 4 x 25 “One Arm Fly” w/15 SR – feel push
Drill: 200 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – feel pull
Drill: 200 “Pull/Push Freestyle” – feel push
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” w/15 SR – feel pull
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” w/15 SR – feel push
Swim: 4 x 25 alternating 25s of Freestyle/Butterfly w/15 SR –
feel pull, then push
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
137

--- Page 139 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 138
Technique Swim Workouts
85
Workout
Focus Point:Accelerate the Arm Stroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 alternating 25s of dolphin/flutter
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle – w/15 SR – feel arm stroke accelerate
towards the back
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – accelerate stroke
towards the back
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle – w/15 SR – feel stroke gain speed from
front to back
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – stroke gains speed
from front to back
Drill: 8 x 25 “Left Arm, Right Arm, Both Arms” w/15 SR –
accelerate the arm stroke
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
138

--- Page 140 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 139
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
86
Workout
Focus Point: Finish Outward
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – press back to finish stroke
Drill: 4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” w/15 SR – press out to
finish stroke
Drill: 200 “One Arm Butterfly” – quick press out to finish
stroke
Swim: 200 Freestyle – quick press back to finish stroke
Drill: 8 x 50 “Left Arm, Right Arm, Both Arms” w/15 SR – quick
press out to finish stroke
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 alternating 25s of “Round off”/Freestyle w/15 SR –
quick finish, out on fly, back on free
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
139

--- Page 141 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 140
Technique Swim Workouts
87
Workout
Focus Point: Positive Recovery
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 dolphin alternating 25s of head leading/hands
leading w/10 SR
Drill: “Recovery in Place” 30 sec. – thumbs up – notice
“negative recovery” with elbows dragging through water
Drill: “Recovery in Place” 30 sec. – thumbs down – notice
“positive recovery” with arms arching over the water
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 – 6 strokes “Pinkies Up” then Freestyle w/ 15 SR
– arms arch over the water
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 – 6 strokes “Pinkies Up”, then Freestyle w/ 15 SR
– thumbs down, pinkies up
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 – 6 strokes “Pinkies Up”, then Freestyle w/ 15 SR
– recovery clears the water
Drill: 8 x 50 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – maintain pinkie up
hand position throughout recovery
Drill: 4 x 50 “Left Arm, Right Arm, Both Arms” w/15 SR
– positive recovery
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 alternating 25s of “Pinkies Up”/Freestyle w/15 SR
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900 + 1 min. stationary drills
140

--- Page 142 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 141
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
88
Workout
Focus Point: Achieving a Relaxed Recovery
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 dolphin alternating 25s on front/on back
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/10 SR – emphasize a relaxed arm and
hand throughout recovery
Drill: 8 x 25 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – relax arm and hand
throughout recovery
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “The Flop” w/15 SR – generate recovery from chest
50 Easy
Drill/Swim:8 x 50 alternating 25s of “One Arm Butterfly”/Freestyle –
chest leads recovery, hands follow
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “The Flop” w/15 SR – hand, wrist, arms and
shoulders should be relaxed
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Freestyle w/15 SR –
achieve a relaxed recovery
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
141

--- Page 143 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:34 Uhr Seite 142
Technique Swim Workouts
89
Workout
Focus Point: Enter Wide and Reach
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Drill: 4 x 25 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – hand enters out
side shoulder
Drill: 4 x 25 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – push elbow to
straight
Drill: 4 x 25 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – reach forward with
thumbs
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “Reaching to a “Y”/Freestyle
w/15 SR – enter wide
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “Reaching to a “Y”/Freestyle
w/15 SR – enter wider
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “Reaching to a “Y”/Freestyle
w/15 SR – enter wide, push elbows to straight
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “Reaching to a “Y”/Freestyle
w/15 SR – enter wider, push elbows to straight
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “Reaching to a “Y”/Freestyle
w/15 SR – enter wide, push elbow to straight, reach
forward with thumbs
Drill/Swim:4 x 50 alternating 25s of “Reaching to a “Y”/Freestyle
w/15 SR – enter wider, push elbow to straight, reach
forward with thumbs
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
142

--- Page 144 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 143
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
143

--- Page 145 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 144
Technique Swim Workouts
90
Workout
Focus Point: Balance on Your Chest
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – swim downhill
Drill: 8 x 25 “Advanced One Arm Fly” w/15 SR – balance on
chest when arm enters
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 – 6 strokes “Reaching a “Y”, then Freestyle w/15
SR - chest low when you reach the “Y”
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 6 strokes “Chest Balance”, then Freestyle w/15 SR
– chest low, hips high when arms enter
Swim: 8 x 50 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Freestyle w/15 SR –
downhill balance
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/30 SR – balance on chest when arms
enter
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
144

--- Page 146 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 145
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
91
Workout
Focus Point: Grab and Go... Don’t Lose Your Momentum
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 25 dolphin w/10 SR – fluid action
Swim: 100 Freestyle – emphasizing unified entry, reach and
catch action
Swim/Drill:200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/“One Arm Butterfly” –
enter, reach and catch
Swim/Drill:200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/“Advanced One Arm
Butterfly” – enter, reach and catch
Swim: 100 Freestyle – emphasizing continuous entry, reach and
catch action
Swim/Drill:200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/“One Arm Butterfly” –
maintain momentum at entry
Swim/Drill:200 alternating 25s of Freestyle/“Advanced One Arm
Butterfly” –- maintain momentum at entry
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 “No Pause Butterfly” for 6 strokes, then Freestyle
w/15 SR – grab water and go
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Freestyle w/15 SR –
Grab and go... don’t lose your momentum
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
145

--- Page 147 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 146
Technique Swim Workouts
92
Workout
Focus Point: Inhale at the Natural High Point of the Stroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 dolphin
Swim: 200 Freestyle – focus on the rhythmic breathing
Drill: “Breathing Timing Drill” – 30 seconds – face in water
with arms forward, face out with arms back
Drill: “Breathing Timing Drill” – 30 seconds – face rises as
arms pull back
Drill: “Breathing Timing Drill” – 30 seconds – face descends as
arms recover
Swim: 8 x 25 for 8 strokes Butterfly, then Freestyle w/15 SR –
face rises as arms pull back
Swim: 8 x 25 for 8 strokes Butterfly, then Freestyle w/15 SR –
face descends as arms recover
Drill: 200 “Flying Dolphin Dives” – feel the natural high point
of the stroke
Drill: 200 “Flying Dolphin Dives” – inhale at the natural high
point of the stroke
Swim: 200 Freestyle – focus on the continual inhale/exhale
action
Drill: “Breathing Timing Drill” – 30 seconds – exhale while face
is in water
Drill: “Breathing Timing Drill” – 30 seconds – inhale when face
rises
Drill: “Breathing Timing Drill” – 30 seconds – no breath
holding!
146

--- Page 148 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 147
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 “No Pause Butterfly” 8 strokes, then Freestyle
w/15 SR – inhale at the high point
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/20 SR – find the natural high point of
the stroke and inhale
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000 + 3 min. stationary drills
147

--- OCR from Page 148 Image 1 ---
iy, 7 5
. Mt, IGRI A: —

vas

--- Page 149 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 148
Technique Swim Workouts
93
Workout
Focus Point: Look Down at the Water When Inhaling
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 your choice w/10 SR
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – focus on low profile breathing
Swim: 8 x 50 Breaststroke w/15 SR – focus on looking at the
water while inhaling
Drill/Swim:8 x 25 “Eyes on the Water Butterfly” for 8 strokes, then
Freestyle w/15 SR – look down at the water
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Breaststroke w/15 SR –
look down at the water while inhaling
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
148

--- Page 150 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 149
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
94
Workout
Focus Point: Breathe Forward, Not Up!
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 your choice
Swim: 200 Freestyle w/15 SR – feel reach, then catch
Swim: 200 Freestyle w/15 SR – feel pull, then push
Drill: 200 “One Arm Butterfly” – feel reach, catch, pull, push
Drill/Swim:4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” for 8 strokes, then
Freestyle w/15 SR – feel reach, catch, pull, push
Drill/Swim:4 x 25 “Tracing Question Marks” for 8 strokes, then
Freestyle w/15 SR – feel the front to back motion of each
stroke
Drill: “Pitch to Press” 1 min. – focus on pitching hands to
press back, not down on the water
Swim: 8 x 50 alternating 25s of “Tracing Question Marks”/
Freestyle w/15 SR – breathe forward, not up
Drill: 8 x 25 “No Pause Butterfly” for 10 strokes, then Freestyle
w/15 SR – breathe forward while pressing back
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900 + 1 min. stationary drills
149

--- OCR from Page 150 Image 1 ---
yyanaadd

--- Page 151 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 150
Technique Swim Workouts
95
Workout
Focus Point: Get Your Head Back Down Quickly
into the Line of the Stroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 200 dolphin
Swim: 8 x 50 Freestyle w/15 SR – focus on rhythmic breathing
Swim: 8 x 25 for 8 strokes Butterfly, then Freestyle w/15 SR –
face rises as arms pull back
Swim: 8 x 25 for 8 strokes Butterfly, then Freestyle w/15 SR –
face descends as arms recover
Drill: 4 x 25 “Positive Recovery” w/15 SR – feel arch recovery
over water
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “The Flop” w/15 SR – head descends with chest
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “Hammer and Nail” w/15 SR – forehead hits water
first, not chin
50 Easy
Drill: 4 x 25 “Reaching to a “Y” w/15 SR – head returns to the
water before hands
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly for 10 strokes, then Freestyle w/15 SR –
get head back down into the line of the stroke
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
150

--- Page 152 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 151
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
151

--- Page 153 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 152
Technique Swim Workouts
96
Workout
Focus Point: Finding Your Best Breathing Pattern
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 your choice w/10 SR
Swim: 100 Freestyle – breathing every 2 strokes
Swim: 100 Freestyle – breathing every 3 strokes
Swim: 100 Freestyle – breathing every 4 strokes
Swim: 100 Freestyle – breathing every 5 strokes
Swim: 50 Butterfly w/15 SR – breathing every 4 strokes
Swim: 50 Butterfly w/15 SR – breathing every 3 strokes
Swim: 50 Butterfly w/15 SR – breathing every 2 strokes
Swim: 50 Butterfly w/15 SR – breathing every stroke
50 Easy
Swim: 200 Freestyle with your most comfortable breathing
pattern
Swim: 25 Butterfly – choose the breathing pattern that is most
sustainable
Swim: 25 Butterfly – choose the breathing pattern that is most
rhythmic
Swim: 25 Butterfly – choose the breathing pattern that is most
fluid
Swim: 25 Butterfly – choose the breathing pattern that most
comfortable
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Freestyle – find your
best breathing pattern
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,900
152

--- Page 154 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 26.01.2009 11:53 Uhr Seite 153
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
153

--- Page 155 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 154
Technique Swim Workouts
97
Workout
Focus Point: Fitting Two Dolphins into Each Stroke
Warm up: 200
Kick: 300 your choice
Drill: 100 “Body Wave” – feel the dolphin action start high in
the body and snap down to the feet
Drill: 200 “One Arm Butterfly” – feet snap down as arm enters
and catches
Drill: 200 “One Arm Butterfly” – feet snap down again as arm
finishes underwater stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – kick and pull, kick and push
Drill/Swim:4 x 25 “No Kick Butterfly” for 10 strokes, then Freestyle
w/15 SR – incorporate the body wave
Drill/Swim:4 x 25 “No Kick Butterfly” for 10 strokes, then Freestyle
w/15 SR – avoid over-bending knees
Drill/Swim:4 x 25 “No Kick Butterfly” for 10 strokes, then Freestyle
w/15 SR – feel the dolphin roll down to your feet anyway
Drill: 100 “Left Arm, Right Arm, Both Arms” – two dolphins per
stroke
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR - kick and pull, kick and push
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – kick to enter, kick to exit
Cool down: 100
Total: 1,850
154

--- Page 156 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 155
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
98
Workout
Focus Point: Coordination: Kick and Catch
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 your choice w/15 SR
Drill: 8 x 50 “Freestyle with Dolphin” w/15 SR – hand strikes
the water as feet snap down
Drill: 200 “One Arm Butterfly” – feel kick and catch at the
same time
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – kick and catch
50 Easy
Drill: 200 “One Arm Butterfly” – feel kick and catch at the
same time
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – kick and catch
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Freestyle w/15 SR – feel
shift of weight down and forward as you kick and catch
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
155

--- Page 157 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 156
Technique Swim Workouts
99
Workout
Focus Point: Coordination: Kick and Finish
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 your choice w/15 SR
Drill: 8 x 50 “Freestyle with Dolphin” w/15 SR – hand quickly
finishes stroke as feet snap down
Drill: 200 “Advanced One Arm Butterfly” – feel kick and finish
at the same time
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – kick and finish
50 Easy
Drill: 200 “Advanced One Arm Butterfly” – feel kick and finish
at the same time
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – kick and finish
50 Easy
Swim: 8 x 25 alternating 25s of Butterfly/Freestyle w/15 SR –
feel forward lift as you kick and finish
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
156

--- Page 158 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 157
Technique Workouts for Butterfly
100
Workout
Focus Point: Butterfly Coordination
Warm up: 200
Kick: 8 x 50 alternating 50s of dolphin/flutter w/10 SR
Drill: 4 x 50 “One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – rhythmic stroke,
rhythmic dolphin
Drill: 4 x 50 “Advanced One Arm Butterfly” w/15 SR – quick
finish and kick at the same time
Drill: 4 x 25 “Eyes on the Water Butterfly” w/15 SR – breathe
forward, not up
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – emphasize fast round out
finish of stroke
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – emphasize fast finish and
simultaneous kick
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – emphasize fast finish, kick and
inhale at the same time
50 Easy
Drill/Swim:200 alternating 25s of “Coordination Checkpoint”/
Freestyle
50 Easy
Swim: 4 x 25 Butterfly w/15 SR – notice yourself move forward
while you finish fast,
kick and inhale
Cool down: 100
Total: 2,000
157

--- Page 159 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 158
158

--- Page 160 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 159
Conclusion
CONCLUSION
Congratulations on taking on the journey of improving your
swimming efficiency by working on the technique of swimming. If you
have made it through all or most of these workouts, you have
traveled a long way on that journey. You have practiced positive
body position, productive kicking, the path of the stroke, recovery,
alignment, leverage and coordination. You are now equipped with an
awareness of many important elements that affect swimming
efficiency.
You might be asking where this journey ends. The fact is, it doesn’t.
Even the most accomplished swimmer continues to refine technique,
forever reaching for even more efficient swimming. It is a life long
quest. It is a continuing journey of discovery, worth every stroke.
159

--- Page 161 Text ---
Technique Swim Workouts 22.01.2009 11:35 Uhr Seite 160
Technique Swim Workouts
CREDITS
Cover: Jens Vogelsang
Cover photo: dpa Picture-Alliance GmbH
Photography: Vince Corbella, Kurt Krueger, Avital Brodin, Nick
Umemoto, Lynn Sun, Blythe Lucero
Illustrations: Blythe Lucero
Swimmers Appearing in the Photos:
Meredith Anderson, Vicky Augustine, Jennifer Barra, Pam Bennett,
Cornelia Bleul-Gohlke, Jonas Brodin, Monique Comacchio, Kathryn
Cohn, Sara Ebadi, Chris Fish, Kathryn Fletcher, Seth Goddard, Liam
Goddfrey, Laura Howard, Caroline Howard, Rachel Howard, Ellen
Johns, Eric Johnson, Tami Kasamatsu, Siobhan Langlois, Bonnie
Lucero, Blythe Lucero, Elise Lusk, Jessica Moll, Mary Moorhead, Alvaro
Pastor, Dave Robert, Lissa Suden, Ian Umemoto, Nick Umemoto.
Thanks to all the Berkeley swimming community for making the most
of our water.
Thanks to Martinez, Demo, Lucky, Scott, Bob, Tailio, Fat Cat and
Arrow’s Sister & company for their support.
160

--- Page 162 Text ---
THE BOOK
This is the first book in a 3-book-series called “Coach Blythe’s Swim
Workouts“. It contains 100 workouts that focus on improving general
swimming efficiency, with specific workouts for each of the competitive
swimming strokes. The workouts in this book blend swimming drills and
conditioning sets that total up to 2,000 yards/meters. Each workout is
accompanied by a “Focus Point” to help swimmers zero in on stroke
improvements by eliminating drag, improving feel for the water, and
swimming in a core-centered manner.
THE AUTHOR
Blythe Lucero has been coaching swimming for more than 25 years. She
currently oversees two teams, Berkeley Aquatic Masters and Berkeley
Barracudas, where she brings her passion for swimming to the
development and training of swimmers of all ages and abilities, from
novice to world class. Blythe grew up in Berkeley, California in a large
athletic family. She swam competitively in her youth, achieving All-
American status in college. In addition to coaching swimming, she trains
Water Safety Instructors for the Red Cross. She also works as a professional
graphic designer. The 3-book-series “Coach Blythe’s Swim Workouts”
follows the successful book “The 100 Best Swimming Drills” published in
2007, and “Masters Swimming - A Manual” published in 2006.
SS
TT
UU
OO
KK
RR
OO
WW
MM
II
WW
SS
EE
UU
QQ
II
NN
HH
CC
EE
TT
Umschlag Technique Swim Workouts 09.02.2009 12:40 Uhr Seite 1
Coach Blythe’s Swim Workouts are appropriate for the self-coached
swimmer and triathlete, as well as for coaches looking for workout
content for the athletes they train.
ISBN 978-1-84126-268-0
$ 16.95 US/£ 12.95/A16.95
www.m-m-sports.com

--- OCR from Page 162 Image 2 ---
Coach Blythe’s Swim Workouts are appropriate for the self-coached
swimmer and triathlete, as well as for coaches looking for workout
content for the athletes they train.

THE BOOK

This is the first book in a 3-book-series called “Coach Blythe’s Swim
Workouts”. It contains 100 workouts that focus on improving general
swimming efficiency, with specific workouts for each of the competitive
swimming strokes. The workouts in this book blend swimming drills and
conditioning sets that total up to 2,000 yards/meters. Each workout is
accompanied by a “Focus Point” to help swimmers zero in on stroke
improvements by eliminating drag, improving feel for the water, and
swimming in a core-centered manner.

THE AUTHOR

Blythe Lucero has been coaching swimming for more than 25 years. She
currently oversees two teams, Berkeley Aquatic Masters and Berkeley
Barracudas, where she brings her passion for swimming to the
development and training of swimmers of all ages and abilities, from
novice to world class. Blythe grew up in Berkeley, California in a large
athletic family. She swam competitively in her youth, achieving All-
American status in college. In addition to coaching swimming, she trains
Water Safety Instructors for the Red Cross. She also works as a professional
graphic designer. The 3-book-series “Coach Blythe’s Swim Workouts”
follows the successful book “The 100 Best Swimming Drills” published in
2007, and “Masters Swimming - A Manual” published in 2006.

ISBN 978-1-84126-268-0

| 51695
0

9781841126268
$ 16.95 US/E 12.95/€ 16.95

www.m-m-sports.com

--- OCR from Page 162 Image 3 ---
com