
--- Page 1 Text ---
The
Swim Coaching
Bible
Dick Hannula
Nort Thornton
Editors
Human Kinetics

--- Page 2 Text ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The swim coaching bible / Dick Hannula, Nort Thornton, editors.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-7360-3646-6
1. Swimming--Coaching. I. Hannula, Dick, 1928- II. Thornton, Nort, 1933-
GV837.65.S95 2001
797.2'1--dc21
00-054241
ISBN-10 (Print): 0-7360-3646-6
ISBN-13 (Print): 978-0-7360-3646-7
ISBN-10 (Adobe PDF): 0-7360-8156-9
ISBN-13 (Adobe PDF): 978-0-7360-8156-6
Copyright ©2001 by Human Kinetics, Inc.
All rights reserved. Except for use in a review, the reproduction or utilization of this work in any form or
by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including xerography,
photocopying, and recording, and in any information storage and retrieval system, is forbidden without
the written permission of the publisher.
Developmental Editor: Julie Rhoda; Assistant Editor and Copyeditor: Carla Zych; Proofreader:
Bob Replinger; Graphic Designer: Robert Reuther; Graphic Artists: Kimberly Maxey and Brian
McElwain; Photo Manipulation; Brian McElwain; Photo Manager: Clark Brooks; Cover Designer:
Keith Blomberg; Photographer (cover): ©SportsChrome East/West; Photographer (interior): Please
see page viii for credits; Art Manager: Craig Newsom; Illustrator: Roberto Sabas; Printer: United
Graphics
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book excerpts
can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6
Human Kinetics
Web site: www.HumanKinetics.com
United States: Human Kinetics Australia: Human Kinetics
P.O. Box 5076 57A Price Avenue
Champaign, IL 61825-5076 Lower Mitcham, South Australia 5062
800-747-4457 08 8277 1555
e-mail: humank@hkusa.com e-mail: liaw@hkaustralia.com
Canada: Human Kinetics New Zealand: Human Kinetics
475 Devonshire Road Unit 100 Division of Sports Distributors NZ Ltd.
Windsor, ON N8Y 2L5 P.O. Box 300 226 Albany
800-465-7301 (in Canada only) North Shore City
e-mail: orders@hkcanada.com Auckland
0064 9 448 1207
Europe: Human Kinetics
e-mail: info@humankinetics.co.nz
207 Bradford Road
Stanningley
Leeds LS28 6AT, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 113 255 5665
e-mail: hk@hkeurope.com

--- Page 3 Text ---
THE Swim CoaCHiNg BiBlE
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton, Editors
Endorsed by the world Swimming Coaches association

--- Page 4 Text ---
introduction
CoNTENTS
Acknowledgments vii
introduction ix
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton
ParT i Establishing Priorities and Principles  .  .  .  . 1
Chapter 1 Believing in Belief  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3
Richard Quick
Chapter 2 Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .9
Jean Freeman
Chapter 3 Coaching With Integrity .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .23
Peter Daland
ParT ii Directing a Program to its Full Potential .  . 33
Chapter 4 Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels  .
35
John Leonard
Chapter 5 Administering and Marketing a Winning Program  .  .  .  .51
Jack Bauerle
Chapter 6 Developing a Successful Team .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .65
Skip Kenney
Chapter 7 Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development .  .  .  .  .  .  .71
Bill Sweetenham
ParT iii Creating Effective Practice Sessions  .  .  .  . 97
Chapter 8 Long- and Short-Range Planning .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .99
Jill Sterkel
Chapter 9 Putting Science Into Practice  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .111
Bruce R. Mason
Chapter 10 Applying the Art of Coaching  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .121
Deryk Snelling
iv

--- Page 5 Text ---
introduction
ParT iV Teaching Stroke Techniques  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .133
Chapter 11 Freestyle Technique .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .135
Rick DeMont
Chapter 12 Backstroke Technique  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .151
Dick Hannula
Chapter 13 Butterfly Technique  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .163
Pablo Morales
Chapter 14 Breaststroke Technique .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .179
David Salo
Chapter 15 Starts, Turns, and Finishes .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .189
John Trembley
ParT V Training for optimal Performance  .  .  .  .  . 207
Chapter 16 Freestyle Sprint Training  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .209
Michael Bottom
Chapter 17 Freestyle Middle-Distance Training .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .221
Doug Frost
Chapter 18 Freestyle Distance Training  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .239
Dick Jochums
Chapter 19 Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .269
Eddie Reese
Chapter 20 Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training  .  .  .  .  .  .  .283
Bill Rose
Chapter 21 Breaststroke Training .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .297
Jon Urbanchek
Chapter 22 Individual Medley Training  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .309
Dick Shoulberg
Chapter 23 Relay Training .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .319
David Marsh
Chapter 24 Power Training .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .327
Randy Reese
Chapter 25 Preparing to Excel in Competition .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .335
Don Gambril
About the Editors 349
About the contributors 350
v

--- Page 7 Text ---
introduction
aCKNowlEDgmENTS
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton would like to acknowledge and thank
all the chapter authors of The Swim Coaching Bible for contributing their
great knowledge and experience. All of them were willing to share their
talents and to give back to the entire swimming community. Their time
and effort made this book a success.
vii

--- Page 8 Text ---
introduction
PHoTo CrEDiTS
All photos provided by contributors unless otherwise noted.
Pages 3 and 356 (Richard Quick) © David Gonzales
Pages 9 and 352 (Jean Freeman) © Eric Miller, Women’s Athletics, Uni-
versity of Minnesota Athletic Department
Pages 23 (Peter Daland) and 35 (Doc Counsilman) Courtesy of Interna-
tional Swimming Hall of Fame
Pages 51 and 350 (Jack Bauerle) Courtesy of University of Georgia Ath-
letic Department
Pages 99 and 359 (Jill Sterkel) and 269 and 357 (Eddie Reese) Courtesy
of University of Texas Athletic Department
Pages 111 and 355 (Bruce Mason, PhD) Courtesy of Australian Sports
Commission
Pages 163 and 356 (Pablo Morales) Courtesy of San Jose State University
Sports Information Office
Page 179 (David Salo) Courtesy of Dan Albano/Orange County Regis-
ter
Pages 189 and 360 (John Trembley) Courtesy of University of Tennessee
Athletic Department
Pages 209 and 350 (Michael Bottom) © Scott Greenwood
Pages 221and 352 (Doug Frost) Courtesy of World Swim Coaches As-
sociation
Pages 297 and 361 (Jon Urbanchek) Courtesy of University of Michigan
Athletic Department
Pages 319 and 355 (David Marsh) Courtesy of Auburn University Ath-
letic Department
Page 351 (Peter Daland) Courtesy of American Swim Coaches Associa-
tion
Page 358 (Dick Shoulberg) © Gabrielle Russomagno
viii

--- Page 9 Text ---
introduction
iNTroDuCTioN
Dick Hannula and Nort Thornton
What has brought the greatest change in swim coaching over the past 50
years or so? It would have to be the increase in knowledge made avail-
able through various reference sources for swim coaches.
We can remember being fascinated, as young swimmers and then as
young coaches, by what the more famous American swimming coach-
es—Bob Kiphuth of Yale, Matt Mann of Michigan, Mike Peppe of Ohio
State, and many others—had to say about swimming and training. We
would read and listen to everything we could find about the training
philosophies of the great coaches—George Haines, Peter Daland, Don
Gambril, and Doc Counsilman—and could hardly wait for Swimming
World magazine to arrive each month so we could read the “How They
Train” columns. One of us even corresponded with the great Australian
coach Forbes Carlile at his Ryde Club in Australia, in an effort to soak
up every bit of swimming knowledge possible.
Books, clinics, and magazine articles have always been great sources
for cutting-edge coaching information. In swimming, there is a great
willingness on the part of coaches to share information. Coaches in all
the leading swimming nations have the attitude that as each swimmer
gets faster the expectation level of all swimmers is raised, that in this
way all of swimming will get faster. This attitude was apparent when we
approached potential contributors to this book and asked each to write a
specific chapter. Every coach accepted on the first request. The advance-
ment of the quality of coaching was their primary consideration.
When we began to talk about the possibility of putting this book to-
gether, we were very excited at the prospect of having the top coaches
of today write a chapter on the topic that they are best known for. Each
of the coaches who contributed to this book is tremendously successful
in his or her own right; each does many things well and could easily
put out an entire book filled with knowledge gained from his or her ex-
periences. The beauty of this book is that it features an all-star cast—a
smorgasbord of superstars.
The Swim Coaching Bible is a compilation of the best written material
ix

--- Page 10 Text ---
introduction
of some of the world’s most successful swim coaches into a one-source
reference book. We have gathered the best available writing on topics
of importance to produce a work that we hope will serve as a guidepost
for swim coaches around the world as well as an invaluable source
for swimmers and parents who want to know more about competitive
swimming.
The coach-contributors were given free rein within their assigned
topics. They were free to develop that topic in whatever way they felt
necessary to attain the best results. The overlap of some of the contribu-
tors’ information was considered a necessary consequence of allowing
many coaches to share their roads to success. There is a tremendous
amount of individual and collective knowledge in this book. If you use
this book as a reference, we are certain that you will find what you are
looking for today and will revisit the book many times in the future for
information and opinions on totally different topics.
The contributors we’ve selected offer a diverse assortment of views,
experiences, and nationalities. Most of the chapter authors coach in the
United States. Three contributors—Bill Sweetenham (chapter 7), Bruce
Mason (chapter 9), and Doug Frost (chapter 17)—hail from Australia.
Deryk Snelling (chapter 10) has coaching roots in both Canada and Great
Britain.
The wisdom and experience of the contributors has been proven by the
success of their swimmers. Almost all the authors have either coached
Olympic gold medalists or have acquired gold medals themselves as
swimmers. Richard Quick, Mike Bottom, Doug Frost, and Jon Urbanchek
have coached individual Olympic champions as recently as the Sydney
Olympics.
We’ve organized The Swim Coaching Bible into five sections. Part I
establishes priorities and principles necessary for the foundation of any
swimming program. Richard Quick leads off in chapter 1 with “Believing
in Belief.” One of the most successful coaches in the world, the Stanford
University women’s coach and many time US Olympic coach gives his
distinct insight on the necessity of belief in order to succeed. We’ve
watched Richard work his coaching magic as a manager of an Olympic
team and as a Pan-Pacific assistant coach. This is a must-read chapter
for every coach and swimmer.
Jean Freeman, the women’s coach at the University of Minnesota, is
one of the most successful coaches in the Big Ten Conference. She is
well known for her ability to make the swimming experience fun and
to instill a lifelong love of the sport in her swimmers. Her philosophy
and methods are the subject of chapter 2.
x

--- Page 11 Text ---
introduction
Peter Daland, retired coach of the University of Southern California
and two-time US Olympic head coach, is one of the most respected
men in swimming. Dick Hannula knows this firsthand, as two of his
sons swam for Peter at USC. He is well qualified to speak on coaching
with integrity, and his work on the drug committee of the World Swim
Coaches’ Association has contributed greatly to the control of perfor-
mance-enhancing drugs in swimming.
Part II includes five chapters about directing a program to its full po-
tential. In chapter 4 John Leonard, swim coach and executive director of
the American Swim Coaches’ Association, discusses how to adapt your
coaching approach to meet the needs of the entire spectrum of swimmers.
He specifically addresses differences in age, ability, and gender as well
as the particular concerns of high school and college teams.
Jack Bauerle coaches at the University of Georgia and was a US Olym-
pic team coach in 2000. He provides many insights into administering
and marketing a successful program in chapter 5.
Chapter 6 deals with developing a successful team. Skip Kenney,
coach at Stanford University and US Olympic head coach in 1996, gets
to the very heart of this subject. Skip’s college teams have won the NCAA
Championship title many times. His Pac 10 Championship meet titles
extend over 20 consecutive years, surpassing John Wooden’s consecu-
tive Pac 10 Championship record in basketball at UCLA. This is one of
the most phenomenal records in collegiate swimming.
Chapter 7 is written by legendary Australian swim coach Bill Sweet-
enham. Having served many times as the Australian Olympic coach and
having spent the past several years as the National Youth Development
Coach in Australia, he is now taking over the position of National Team
Coach for Great Britain. Bill’s experience and knowledge of swimming
is unsurpassed, and he covers the subject of maximizing swim talent
clearly and specifically in his chapter.
Creating an effective practice session and season is the subject of part
III, and the three related chapters cover this topic comprehensively. Jill
Sterkel covers long- and short-range planning in chapter 8. As a former
world-record holder, four-time Olympic swimmer, and the current
women’s coach at the University of Texas, Jill brings great experience
to her chapter.
In chapter 9, Dr. Bruce Mason discusses putting science—biomechan-
ics, physiotherapy, altitude training, and more—into practice. He is one
of the most qualified swimming biomechanists in the world and serves
the Australian Institute of Sport, the Australian Olympic team, and (as
a director) the International Society of Biomechanics in Sports.
xi

--- Page 12 Text ---
introduction
Deryk Snelling writes on the art of coaching in chapter 10. He has
coached successfully internationally for decades. Dick first knew Deryk
as the coach of the Vancouver Canadian Dolphins; Deryk had then, as
he does now, an uncanny ability to get more out of his swimmers than
their obvious talent might indicate. His insights on the art of coaching
are highly valued.
Part IV concentrates on teaching stroke technique, including starts,
turns, and finishes. Each chapter in this section is written by coaches
who have brought something unique and special to the teaching of
technique. Rick Demont, former world-record holder in the 400 meter
and 1,500-meter freestyle, covers two different freestyle techniques in
chapter 11.
Dick Hannula discusses the finer points of backstroke technique in
chapter 12. Dick focuses on the 3 R’s of backstroke and looks closely at
the unique style of Lenny Krayzelburg.
Pablo Morales is a former world-record holder and gold medalist in
the 100-meter butterfly who now coaches at San Jose State. He has writ-
ten clearly and with great feeling about sharpening technique for better
butterfly in chapter 13.
Dave Salo has had phenomenal success with breaststrokers as a club
coach and was an assistant coach for the United States at the Sydney
Olympics. His greatest breaststroke success thus far has been Amanda
Beard’s performance at the Atlanta Olympics. At the Northwest Swim
Coaches’ Clinic a few years ago Dave gave an exceptionally comprehen-
sive and understandable presentation on breaststroke technique. His
chapter 14 covers the same topic in similar fashion.
John Trembley has continued the tradition of great racing starts and
turns that the University of Tennessee is know for. He is unquestionably
the best clinic speaker and writer on the technical aspects of starts and
turns in swimming today. He was a natural choice to write chapter 15
on starts, turns, and finishes.
The final section, part V, covers the training necessary to achieve
optimal performance. The list of coach-contributors is once again most
impressive in terms of the success they’ve had with their swimmers.
Mike Bottom, who swam at USC and now coaches with Nort Thornton
at the University of California at Berkeley, specializes in sprint training
(chapter 16). Mike’s training program for sprinters is highly specific and
very unique. His unconventional program has been very successful,
producing NCAA champions and three of the five fastest swimmers in
the world in 2000—including the two 50-meter freestyle gold medalists
in Sydney, Gary Hall Jr. and Anthony Ervin.
xii

--- Page 13 Text ---
introduction
Doug Frost coaches the great Ian Thorpe of Australia. In chapter 17,
on middle-distance training, Doug details his philosophy and training
methods. We are very proud to have him as one of the contributors to
this book.
Dick Jochums is an innovator as well as a practical coach who has
always believed in specificity over yardage. His swimmers have achieved
great success, including Olympic gold. He shares his philosophy on
freestyle distance training in chapter 18.
Eddie Reese, who wrote chapter 19 on backstroke and butterfly sprint
training, is one of the great communicators in coaching. Eddie has that
rare ability to make a difference. A great storyteller and a great leader,
he continues to stay at or near the top of the collegiate championship
scene.
Bill Rose has coached in both Canada and the United States, and is
presently coaching the Mission Viejo Swim Club. Author of chapter
20 on backstroke and butterfly 200-meter training, he has coached top-
ranked back and butterfly swimmers in the 200 event for many years. He
continues to be one of the more successful elite coaches in the United
States today.
Jon Urbanchek is known for his down-to-earth style and his ability to
identify with his swimmers. His program at the University of Michigan is
responsible for a steady stream of Olympic champions, including world-
record holder Mike Barrowman in the 200-meter breaststroke. While
he writes about breaststroke training in chapter 21, he could have also
written on the 200 butterfly, the event his athlete Tom Malchow won in
Sydney; the 400 IM, the event in which Tom Dolan, a former University
of Michigan swimmer, has twice been Olympic champion; or distance
freestyle, in which another of his athletes, Chris Thompson, won the
bronze medal in the 1,500 meters at Sydney. We are very pleased that Jon
has provided this excellent chapter on training for the breaststroke.
Dick Shoulberg is a walking bundle of enthusiasm. He loves swim-
ming and the swimmers who are willing to do the work to be successful.
After 31 years at the Germantown Academy, Dick continues to turn out
Olympians. In chapter 22, he writes about individual medley training, a
topic with which he is quite familiar. His successes in the IM include a
world-record holder as well as several Olympians and medal winners.
David Marsh has been quite successful at Auburn University, having
won national championship titles in both men’s and women’s swim-
ming. He served as an assistant coach for the 2000 US Olympic team.
His Auburn relay teams have been awesome, and he was a great choice
for chapter 23 on relay training.
One of the great innovators in swimming, Randy Reese has always
xiii

--- Page 14 Text ---
introduction
been willing to try new approaches. His unique ideas of developing
strength and power while in the water have been most successful. When
Randy speaks, as he does in chapter 24 on power training, smart coaches
listen.
Our final chapter (25) on preparing to excel in competitions is written
by legendary coach Don Gambril. Don coached five US Olympic teams
and produced world-record holders almost from the start of his career.
He is one of the most successful swimming coaches ever; he knows what
it takes to excel and can talk effectively and convincingly to swimmers.
As a coach, he could tell swimmers what the world record was, what it
would take to break that record, and that he believed that the swimmer
could do it. We think you’ll find that Don closes this book on a positive,
inspiring note.
As we put this material together, we found it fascinating reading and
could not wait to use the information in our coaching. We believe this
is exactly the way you will feel when you delve into the chapters we
have collected here. Whether you are actively coaching or swimming,
or are simply taken with the sport of swimming, you have many hours
of interesting reading ahead. We urge coaches and swimmers to read
The Swim Coaching Bible and then to keep it handy for future reference
and motivation.
xiv

--- Page 15 Text ---
Part
I
Establishing
Priorities and
Principles

--- Page 17 Text ---
c h a p t e r o n e
Believing in
Belief
richard Quick

--- Page 18 Text ---
Quick
how could Dara torres—at age 33 and having been out of swimming for
seven years—return to the sport in 2000 after only 1 months of train-
ing and swim significantly faster than ever before in each of her events,
setting two american records and taking five olympic medals (two of
them gold on world-record relays)?
how could american 200-meter butterflyer Misty hyman drop from
2:09.2 (her lifetime best) at the 2000 olympic trials to 2:05.88 just 30
days later to beat world-record holder and defending olympic cham-
pion Susie o’neill, breaking o’neill’s six-year winning streak in the
200 butterfly?
how do several women, and thousands of men and boys, now swim
the 200-meter freestyle faster than Don Schollander ever did? recog-
nized as one of the most talented swimmers ever to put on a Speedo,
Don was the first man to break 2:00 in the 200-meter freestyle. he had a
perfect stroke and swam in the best swimming environment possible in
the 1960s, the Santa clara Swim club. he was coached by the greatest
coach of all time, George haines, who coached more olympians, more
gold medalists, and more world-record holders than any coach in his-
tory. how is it that today, swimming in less than perfect environments,
guided by coaches less proficient than haines, so many swimmers can
achieve faster times than Don Schollander did?
the common denominator among Dara torres, Misty hyman, and all
the swimmers who swim faster than Don Schollander is a deep core be-
lief that they can accomplish what at one time appeared to most people
to be impossible.
Belief Makes the Extraordinary Ordinary
have you ever noticed that once something extraordinary is accom-
plished it becomes more ordinary? Why is that? When one human
being, believing that he or she will be successful, prepares to achieve
and then accomplishes the extraordinary, it seems to give the rest of us
permission to believe we might be able to accomplish (or surpass) the
same goal. the feat becomes feasible, attainable, and therefore more
ordinary. our belief system is expanded beyond the previous limits we
may have placed on it.
thirteen months before Misty hyman’s extraordinary upset of Susie
o’neill in the 2000 olympic 200-meter butterfly event, Misty finished
a very disappointing third in the 200 fly at the pan-pacific champion-
ships in the olympic pool in Sydney. Susie o’neill dominated that
race, nearly breaking Mary t. Meagher’s long-standing world record,


--- Page 19 Text ---
Believing in Belief
and beating Misty by at least four seconds. Misty was discouraged and
began to doubt that she had what it takes to be successful.
I met Misty in the long hallway on the way to the warm-down pool.
(this is the same place I would meet her to celebrate her great olympic
victory 13 months later.) I put my arm around her, and as we walked to
the warm-down pool I told her she was the only swimmer in the world
who could beat Susie in the 200 fly in the olympic Games. I said that al-
though it might seem impossible after such a poor performance I believed
she could win the olympic gold medal in 2000. then I told Misty that it
didn’t matter what I believed she could do if she did not believe she could
do it. at that moment Misty began to believe. She began to believe that if
she swam the ideal race at the ideal time, she’d have a chance.
over the next 12 months as she prepared for the olympic trials, did
doubts ever creep in? absolutely, but she knew that her belief in her
ability and in the possibility of putting together the ideal race at the ideal
time could lead to the extraordinary. Did she have setbacks? absolutely;
she was beaten in the ncaa championships in the 200 fly, she suffered
continuously from allergies that resulted in a chronic lack of energy, and
she dealt with a few illnesses that year. But Misty’s belief system kept
giving her hope. Believe in belief. Belief in yourself and in your goals
is the basis for extraordinary performance.
Belief Brings Commitment
Belief in yourself and in your goals facilitates the attitude that you will
do whatever it takes. Belief allows you to commit to your goal as if you
cannot fail. Dara torres had a belief that she could make the olympic
team as an alternate on the 00 freestyle relay when she called me to ask
if I would be willing to coach her. My first question to her was, “Will you
do whatever it takes to be successful?” her answer was yes. From that
moment on, Dara’s belief in herself and in her goals encouraged her to
pack three years of training into 13 months. her training included up to
eight hours a day of water training, weight training, spinning, running,
tae Bo, resistive stretching, dryland exercises, cutting edge nutrition
and supplementation, deep-tissue massage, and becoming familiar with
“awareness thinking.” Dara’s belief system allowed her to train and to
commit to her goals as if she could not fail.
Believe in belief. Belief in yourself and in your goals allows you to set
new goals as you approach or accomplish your previous goals. at first
Dara believed that she could only make the relay; as she improved she
began to believe that she could make it in an individual event, then in
5

--- Page 20 Text ---
Quick
more than one individual event. eventually she began to believe that she
could win an individual olympic medal. Finally she came to believe that
she could win an individual gold medal. Dara’s growing belief in herself
led to five medals in the 2000 olympic Games, more than any other swim-
mer. She won three bronze medals, the first individual olympic medals
in her storied, four-time U.S. olympic team member career. Believe in
yourself and in your goals; grow and act as if you cannot fail.
true goals are products of an individual’s belief system. a true goal
can only exist if an individual believes it is possible. a true goal is
something that you absolutely believe you can and will accomplish. It
is more than something you write down, something you hope you can
reach, or something a coach or a parent wants you to do. a true goal is
something you know you will accomplish.
a true goal is so much a part of your core belief system that it affects
every activity you do that is even remotely related to that goal. It keeps
you from doing anything that might hinder your success. It allows you
to act, to train, and to compete as if you cannot fail. Your belief system
cannot conceive of failure; it will not let you fall short of your goal. a
true goal is not just a wish or a hope. a true goal will be accomplished.
Believe in belief.
Most people sell themselves short. Most people need permission to
accomplish something. Most of the swimmers who now swim faster
than Don Schollander swam in the 1960s are not considered the most
talented swimmers around, and most are not as well trained or as well
coached as Don was. Most of these swimmers would not have been able
to swim that fast in the 1960s even if they’d had the expert coaching and
the modern, scientific training available today. Why? they would not
have believed it was possible. Until Don Schollander broke the barrier,
no one thought a human could swim that fast.
Belief Gives Permission Beyond Limits
Most of us have to wait for someone else to prove to us that something
can be accomplished. We need permission. the greatest athletes, and
for that matter, the greatest innovators in any field, say, “this will surely
be done in the future; why can’t I be the one to do it now?” they do
not need permission to accomplish feats that others think are unbeliev-
able or impossible. their belief systems are so strong that what seems
extraordinary to most people seems attainable to them.
By far, the most important thing to believe in is yourself. true belief
in yourself allows you to act as if you cannot fail. however, sometimes
6

--- Page 21 Text ---
Believing in Belief
circumstances beyond your control will prevent you from accomplishing
your goals, no matter how much you believe in them. this is disappoint-
ing, but not devastating. true belief in yourself means that your self-worth
is not dependent upon your accomplishments or your possessions.
Jenny thompson is one of the greatest swimmers in the world. She
broke the world record in the 100-meter freestyle in 1992 and in the
100-meter butterfly in 1999. throughout her career, she has won many
world championships, national championships, and olympic medals,
including eight gold medals in relays. In fact, Jenny has more gold med-
als than any other female swimmer in history, but none of her golds are
in individual events. Jenny’s goal was to win an individual gold medal
in her final olympic Games appearance in Sydney. She did not accom-
plish that goal. certainly she was disappointed, but her belief in herself
does not allow her to measure herself by whether or not she received an
individual gold medal in the olympic Games. While Jenny celebrates
her accomplishments in swimming, her many awards, her degree from
Stanford, and her acceptance to columbia University Medical School,
her self-worth is not measured by those things either. Jenny has a deeply
rooted belief in herself as a human being that transcends what she has
or has not done and what she does or does not have.
Belief in yourself and in the possibility of success is the most important
requirement for living an extraordinary life. Believe in belief. Believe
in yourself and the best of the world will come to you—and like Dara,
Misty, and Jenny, you will be prepared to receive it. Don’t sell yourself
short. You do not require permission to do the extraordinary.
Summary
• extraordinary swimmers have a core belief that they can accomplish
what others believe to be impossible.
• Belief will carry you through difficulties and setbacks.
• Belief allows you to commit to your goals.
• act as if you cannot fail.


--- Page 23 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w o
Putting Fun Into
the Swimming
Experience
Jean Freeman

--- Page 24 Text ---
Freeman
remember why you joined your first swim team? Most likely you en-
joyed being in the water and thought swimming was a fun way to be
with friends. I began swimming because the kids in my neighborhood
were swimmers and said it was fun. I joined my first team at age eight
and have been involved with competitive swimming ever since—for
over 40 years. I am still enjoying the sport, possibly more now than ever.
Many things have made the sport fun for me. I hope that as I share some
of my ideas on swimming you will discover some ways to add fun and
enthusiasm for the sport to your coaching and your program
as I look back on what led me to become a swim coach, I realize that
I have wanted to teach ever since I was a young child. teaching and
coaching have much in common; in many ways coaches are teachers,
too. In the course of my development as a coach, I have watched teachers
interact with their classes and have tried to understand how they achieve
rapport with their students. I have found that the best teacher-student
relationships come from an understanding based on trust and respect,
an understanding that takes time and consistency to build. the same
is true of coach-athlete relationships. the best coaches nurture small
successes every day and celebrate them along the way. this positive
reinforcement goes a long way toward building trust and respect; other
swimmers on the team notice that attention and encouragement are given
to those who strive to improve and to do well. Success may be built on
good attendance, learning key technique or competition concepts from
a disappointment, making a new friend, or swimming faster. coaches
must be aware of the physical, mental, and emotional development level
of each age group they work with, as well as any pertinent economic
factors affecting their swimmers, so that they can tailor their approach
accordingly.
the swim coach is in a great situation. Most people who join teams
expect the coach to be in charge. they expect the coach to help them
become better swimmers. the key is to figure out how to get swimmers
from where they are to the next level of development—in technique,
conditioning, discipline, social skills—as well as teaching them appro-
priate competitive attitudes, how to deal with failures, how to strive for
success, and how to celebrate. I am thankful for my education major in
college because of what it taught me about planning. It was drilled into
me that each session should have a clear purpose and a clear plan. the
importance of continually evaluating and attempting to improve the
purpose and plan was also emphasized.
another important concept that I learned through my training as an
educator is the necessity of establishing clear communication. com-
10

--- Page 25 Text ---
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
munication among coaches, swimmers, and parents is critical for any
swim coach. whether it is accomplished through monthly newsletters,
web pages, e-mail, or seasonal parent meetings, this communication not
only serves to keep everyone involved in the program informed, it also
helps coaches find out what their swimmers think is fun and what they
are passionate about. this kind of communication helps swimmers want
to come to practice rather than feeling they have to come to practice.
the following are some observations I have made that I apply to my
everyday coaching to ensure that my athletes have a fun, rewarding swim-
ming experience that allows them to continue to grow. these observations
relate to five basic responsibilities of a coach: building confidence, nur-
turing self-esteem, learning from competition, developing team leaders,
and planning for growth. throughout this chapter I will expand on each
of these responsibilities and offer ways to approach them.
Make Swimming Fun!
Fun is necessary in all worthwhile activities.
Swimmers will stay in the sport if they continue to have fun.
Athletes perform their best when they are having fun.
Champions go fast because they are having fun.
Self-esteem and self-confidence are the two most important gifts we can nurture in oth-
ers and ourselves.
Welcome everyone to your program, wherever they are in life’s journey.
Help your swimmers discover their passion and “go for it.”
Enthusiasm is important on a daily basis.
Maintain a positive attitude toward everything you do.
Forgiveness is necessary everyday.
Listen to swimmers, to staff, and to parents.
Fear of failure is natural. Learn from it and move on.
Celebrate success and give thanks for it along the way.
In order to reach your goals, you must begin with the end in mind.
Building Confidence Through Fun
what is fun? how do we know what will be fun for the swimmers we are
working with? Fun is often age specific, but it is important for coaches
to remember that adults as well as children need to “play” and to have
11

--- OCR from Page 25 Image 1 ---
Make Swimming Fun!

--- Page 26 Text ---
Freeman
fun. practice activities should focus on developmental concepts and on
incorporating fun into these concepts. as you move from group to group
within a team, respect where each group is developmentally and the
skills and techniques they have already learned. here are some concepts
I think need to be emphasized for particular age groups:
• age 6 to 8: having fun, building confidence, and stroke technique
• age 9 to 10: Learning what a team is, learning teamwork, and swim-
ming relays.
• age 11 to 12: Understanding conditioning, beginning goals, self-
esteem, and cooperation skills
• age 13 to 14: Improving social skills, acceptance of others, and
coordination of high school activities
• age 15 to 16: Specializing in events, swim training, and dryland
training
• age 17 to 20: Balancing college or career goals with team and indi-
vidual pursuits
• age 21 and up: Balancing swimming with career and life goals
all ages should keep reinforcing the skills they’ve already learned. I’ve
seen coaches move swimmers up a group level and not keep any of the
stroke drills from the swimmer’s previous group level. this can cause
the swimmer to become uncomfortable, lose confidence, and drop out
of the sport. Instead, when moving swimmers up into a higher group,
coaches should retain some of the swimmer’s old routine and introduce
a few new skills at a time.
Younger swimmers need to have fun and to gain confidence in them-
selves and in their swimming skills. From there, they can branch out and
realize the benefits of being on a team. Small rewards can help inspire
teamwork along the way. For example, I like to give swimmers in the lane
that starts practice on time a special reward, such as being captains of
the relays for that day or deciding what stroke the next set will be. I also
like to reward younger swimmers as a group for working well together.
create small groups by stroke, by car pool, or by age to get them working
together. today’s more mobile society doesn’t provide children with the
same opportunities children of the past had to develop loyalty toward
one another. So it is especially important to create practice groups that
encourage cooperation and loyalty.
as the swimmers get older and more skilled, turn their conditioning
workouts into a game. See who can control pulse rate or stroke rate most
consistently during specific sets. have swimmers guess their times prior
12

--- Page 27 Text ---
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
to particular sets and see who is the best in each lane at calculating the
margin of error. I have my swimmers swim a 6  100 set this way. First
the swimmers guess the time they will meet, then they swim the 100
trying to match their goal time. once they touch the wall, they tell the
coach their goal time, and the coach tells them their actual time. then
they calculate the margin of error (the first one is a “gimme” and doesn’t
count toward the margin of error). after 3  100, we compare margin of
error for athletes in each lane in order to enhance competition. after 6
 100, we see who the lane winner is and who is the best overall that
day. the winner can choose what stroke the next set will be or be a cap-
tain of the relays. During taper we use this set and let the swimmers go
any speed they wish. they generally get caught up in the game, and it
becomes a good way to get some yardage in without the athletes’ being
too nervous.
another fun exercise I use at the beginning of the season, usually
during the first week of practice, is a set I call “social kicking.” this set
consists of 25s or 50s of kicking with a board. Swimmers are put into
groups of two to kick together while talking to each other about their
summer; each swimmer changes partners every 25 or 50. the purpose
is to make sure each swimmer talks with each of their teammates and
doesn’t exclude anyone. this helps the shy team members to talk with
more people. It’s far different than kicking for conditioning, but it works
well as a warm-up and helps to break down any cliques that otherwise
might not talk with swimmers outside their group.
there are many other ways to ensure fun during practice. Some coach-
es are very creative in their workouts. I try to stay up on new ideas by
attending at least one coaching clinic a year. I have attended several of
Debbie potts’ talks at american Swimming coaches association (aSca)
conferences and highly recommend her book Drills & Games: A Fun Way
to Run a Practice (aSca: 800-356-2722). She provides many creative
ideas. here are some ideas for coaches of all levels:
• add one new thing to your pool each season, be it a record board,
a bulletin board, or backstroke flags. Don’t get pool blindness; jazz
it up!
• celebrate birthdays and holidays at the pool. Incorporate the cel-
ebration into your workouts. If it is Suzie’s birthday and she is 10,
do 10 repeats of Suzie’s favorite stroke.
• Set up a system whereby swimmers can earn a letter jacket, or t-
shirt to enhance team spirit. establish guidelines and a progression
of clearly defined steps for team members to follow.
• encourage swimmers to wear team caps, jackets and other items to
13

--- Page 28 Text ---
Freeman
workouts as well as meets. team apparel helps develop team pride
and respect.
• create an annual picnic or awards ceremony to celebrate individual
progress; recognize each swimmer in a positive way. Meet away from
the pool for some special fun activity—biking, rides at an amuse-
ment park, whatever your swimmers would enjoy.
• take one team bus trip a year. Friendships are made, and inde-
pendence from family blossoms, during travel. Set up activities to
prevent swimmers from getting into trouble. recruit volunteer chap-
erones for these trips. Be sure to rotate parent chaperones from year
to year so that all the kids have a chance to gain independence.
I have coached college for the last 27 years, so my idea of fun has been
shaped by my work with this age group. I believe in games and play,
but I focus more on helping student-athletes feel good about themselves
and about our team process. here is a list of items we have added to our
program to keep everyone challenged and to keep the fun alive:
• welcome picnics when the swimmers move into campus—we invite
the men’s and women’s teams, and student-athletes invite whoever
helped them move. It’s a fun, social way to get the year started.
• a Big Sister program run by our captains—this program begins the
summer before the new team members arrive. It includes letters,
e-mails, and phone calls to help them get acquainted before they
arrive and to questions about what students will need while they’re
at college.
• Bike rides to get to know the area—we give swimmers a tour of
the twin cities, the lakes, and the bike paths. Student-athletes are
more likely to enjoy their new environment if they know how to
get around.
• all-sports pentathlons—we encourage our team council to have social,
athletic events that include all the sports teams. It can be a lot fun.
• an athletic booth at our state fair—we invite children up to the stage
to meet our athletes. the athletes talk about themselves and their
sports over a microphone. they show olympic medals, awards, or
take pictures. It is a great role-modeling experience. each day one
sport volunteers and is featured.
• Inner circle breakfast or dinner—each month our women’s athletic
department hosts a breakfast or dinner at which the athletic direc-
tor gives a five minute report, a head coach and a student-athlete
or two are interviewed, and an alum talks about what he or she has
14

--- Page 29 Text ---
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
gained from his or her experience at the University of Minnesota.
the event ends with “Brag-a-Buck,” where attendees can contribute
a buck and say whatever they want. It’s a great time for thank-yous.
a local media person always emcees it, which helps encourage
media interest in our program.
• 3.0 cookouts or dinners—we celebrate all swimmers whose grade
point averages are above a 3.0 and give the 4.0 students some special
recognition, such as being served first.
• a wall of fame—Started by the swimmers and divers in their locker
room to celebrate individual success in all areas of life, this creation
can be used for new internships, dean’s list, or anything.
• team movies—we get together to watch sport-related, inspirational
movies—Fire on the Track: The Steve Prefontaine Story, Without
Limits, The Mighty Ducks, and so on.
one of the most rewarding events of each season is our end-of-the-
year awards banquet. our captains are in charge of music, a slide show,
funny awards, and introducing our guest and the head table. our assis-
tant coach, terry Nieszner, is in charge of reserving the restaurant and
related details, but her real talents lie in being able to make the nicest,
most meaningful comments about each student-athlete at the banquet.
By turns, we have each swimmer stand and face his or her peers, family
and friends. Being honored in this way gives the swimmers a great feeling
to take into their next season or into their years as faithful alums.
every year we celebrate our alums at homecoming by having an alumni
swim meet. It is a co-ed meet with mostly 25s, 50s, and 100s. Many alums
come back, and we try to make sure that they have a good time and feel
welcome. we arrange events for their families, picnics, relay races in
the park, and so on. we have nametags at the meets so people can find
one another. our team knows that this is an important weekend. we tell
stories about our alums the week before to get them in the mood. we
introduce our current team members to the alums, and we encourage
them to mingle and join in the fun. this gives our swimmers the mes-
sage that they will be welcomed back in the future. people want to feel
needed, wanted, and respected.
Nurturing Self-Esteem
I believe self-esteem is the single most powerful force in our lives. the
way we feel about ourselves affects every aspect of who we are and the
kind of relationships we have. coaches must look in the mirror and
15

--- Page 30 Text ---
Freeman
make sure they are happy with who they are. the happier and healthier
the coach, the better the coach. the best gift coaches can give athletes
is the ability to nurture their own self-esteem, but coaches must have it
themselves before they can give it.
I try to make sure that everyone on our staff is on the same page in this
area. I encourage them to use at least one of the following self-esteem
builders every day.
• Use body language that is inviting and pleasant; a smile goes a
long way. Be on deck when swimmers arrive; smile and say hello
to them by name. Interacting positively during practice is critical.
Sometimes this can nip poor behavior in the bud.
• Give a personalized comment such as, “You looked good yesterday
in practice,” or celebrate a swimmer’s good set in front of other team
members.
• Show enthusiasm for each person on the team. we all want to feel
needed, wanted, and appreciated, no matter what age we are.
• If you need to change a swimmer’s behavior, give the correction
along with a compliment on something that the swimmer is doing
well. the earlier in practice the correction is made, the better.
• encourage swimmers to aim higher or to move to the next level. Let
them know they are ready.
• Use a respectful tone of voice.
• Give compliments daily, not just during taper.
• Let team members know they make a difference. the team is better
because of each one of them.
• encourage group work and teamwork.
• encourage swimmers to thank others for racing them in workout.
• encourage swimmers to cheer others on daily.
• Learn to forgive mistakes and move on. Don’t dwell on a poor per-
formance or bad behavior.
• teach swimmers to learn what they can from mistakes or problems
and to expect better in the future. For example, if a swimmer has a
bad turn, point out how he or she can do it better by building speed
into the wall.
• acknowledge risk-taking, as individuals and as a team, and celebrate
it.
• have a five-minute meeting each day to acknowledge some successes
of the day before. ask others to share their dreams or successes.
16

--- Page 31 Text ---
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
this can be done during stretching.
• assess the goals and accomplishments of your swimmers weekly.
Use bulletin boards, web pages, and pictures. celebrate good atten-
dance and promptness, new skills learned, sharing, volunteerism,
races won, and improved times at practices and meets.
• Set up practices so each person can experience success.
another important way to nurture self-esteem in your swimmers is
to have them face their fears. Fear is a natural response that will never
go away as long as an athlete continues to stretch and grow. But if the
fear isn’t faced, it can become a strong demotivator. It drains energy.
procrastinating in facing it can be paralyzing and can cause a swimmer
to miss out on potential growth and improvement. the most effective
way to deal with fear is to tackle it head on. Go out and do what you are
afraid to do; then you have taken care of that fear.
one way to help a team face their fears is to talk about fear with them
and to have them share stories of their own fears. I may plant a seed by
telling a story about a fear I’ve overcome or by leading off with some-
one else who will talk positively about fear. pushing through fear is
less frightening than living with fear. Swimmers can help one another
understand this.
another good way to have swimmers face their fear is to include a
set of intervals that they have never done and to have them set up goal
times that they have to achieve in this set. tell them a day in advance so
that they have time to get a bit anxious, and then hold them accountable
for their results. conclude the sets by talking about what the swimmers
learned from doing them. I use these sets every so often to help our team
handle challenges.
one set we do every three weeks or so is a set of goal 50s. the athletes
first warm up for about an hour, then do three sets of 10  50 on 1:30
with an easy 200 after each set of 10. we use goal times for each athlete
starting with the time of their second, third, and fourth 50 of a 200 from a
meet. If the athletes make their goal times for all 30, they can cool down
and go home. If not, they stay until they make 30. they can also use one
or more teammates to help them make up the number they missed. If a
swimmer uses teammates, each one needs to make their own goal times
for it to count for the person who missed. So if someone misses six, he
or she could get two teammates and each of the three could swim 2 
50. If all three swimmers make their own goals, that would equal six 50s
and they could all cool down. the group effort is helpful in reinforcing
the concept that swimmers can count on their teammates for support
17

--- Page 32 Text ---
Freeman
and encouragement.
revise the goal times right after practice. I try to set the time faster
every three weeks unless the swimmer has missed some. I like to see
them make 30 of 30, but it’s important to tighten up the goals for the more
experienced swimmers. remember, you can learn a lot from failing. our
staff will generally drop goals 0.2 or 0.5 seconds every three weeks. we
ask swimmers during their easy 200 how many they have made, to help
them with accountability and to foster communication between coach
and swimmer. Some individuals love the goal 50s; others fear them. It
has become one of my favorite ways to help swimmers learn how to deal
with fear and anxiety and to encourage teamwork.
a final note about nurturing self-esteem involves welcoming every-
one to the team, no matter where they are in life’s journey. there is a
place for almost anyone on our team. If a student-athlete has not had
year-round swimming experience and wants to come out for the team,
I let them try. that person might make it as an athlete, become a good
manager, or turn into a valued volunteer at practices and meets. Keep
an open mind! as long as an individual can fill a role that supports the
swim program in some way, welcome him or her to the team. while
our program is evaluated on graduation rates and how well we do at
Big tens and Ncaas, of course, there are other things we want to do
well—helping our students become good citizens, get into the majors of
their choice, make great friends, get good jobs, and so forth. I feel there
is a place for many different types of people in a program. If we keep
a welcoming environment and find out where everyone’s passions are,
we can all work together to accomplish great things.
Encouraging Competition as Learning
I have noticed that swimmers seem to come into a program knowing
more about healthy competition if they happen to come from a large
family. having experienced constant competition with their siblings
from day one for toys, attention, and so forth, these athletes know how
to take advantage of and to learn from competition. as coaches, we want
to encourage competition, to welcome it, and to celebrate it as a way
for our swimmers to learn. Swimmers need not avoid competition to
avoid the bad feelings that can accompany failure. coaches can help by
emphasizing winning and learning versus winning and losing.
coaches must communicate clearly to help swimmers see the learn-
ing benefits of an experience they might otherwise perceive as a loss.
coaches should also help swimmers understand that they can gain much
18

--- Page 33 Text ---
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
through healthy competition within practices; they can help each other
achieve their best efforts. teach the swimmers to thank those in their
lane for helping them become better. I expect to hear swimmers say,
“thanks for racing; it was fun!” even at the college level. create lane
assignments so that racing is more likely to occur. thank individuals
for working hard or learning a new skill; it will help them and the team
become better. encourage swimmers to pair up with training partners,
or pair up individual swimmers yourself such that the more negative
swimmers are paired with more positive teammates.
Because competition can be a good motivator, I encourage coaches
to schedule a light competition schedule in the off season. Some teams
have maintenance programs for high school swimmers in the off season,
but I think it is important for coaches to do more than “maintain”; they
should continue to evaluate and to challenge swimmers by encouraging
competition in the off season. Design an off-season practice schedule that
allows balance for the younger swimmers as well as time for the older
swimmers to have meets. Swimmers who do a maintenance program
in the summer that does not include some competitions are often not
motivated enough to gain many benefits. Swim meets are checkpoints
for conditioning as well as race awareness. create a meet schedule even
for summer maintenance swimmers. celebrate every good race, whether
it takes place in workout or at a meet.
the following are some brief tips to help you encourage healthy com-
petition among your swimmers:
• help swimmers view failure as an opportunity to learn about them-
selves.
• talk to those who experience a setback as soon as possible to en-
courage them to see what can be learned from the experience and
then move on.
• Make each practice enjoyable, and summarize what was learned or
accomplished.
Developing Team Leaders
I still remember my age-group coach stopping practice to talk about life
lessons, the importance of fair play, and developing a good work ethic.
he created an environment where even as 10-year-olds we would try to
stop other swimmers from being disruptive, by standing on the bottom,
for example, because we knew we would all have to stop and listen to
this talk again. we wanted to swim, so we helped other kids make better
choices. the coach who leads sets the stage for developing leaders.
19

--- Page 34 Text ---
Freeman
By putting each of your athletes in a leadership role, you encourage
good leadership from everyone and thus good team work. one of the
most effective ways to encourage leadership from each athlete is to seek
out and place value on skills found in different swimmers. For example,
sculling often brings to the front of the group swimmers who may not
necessarily be the fastest in other strokes; see who can create whirlpools
just by sculling. Kicking without a board and balance drills are other
good ways to help vary who the “best” is. Find swimmers who are good
at a particular drill and have them demonstrate their skill to the group.
try not to always use the fastest swimmers; encourage leadership in
every member of the team.
the following are some other ways to develop team leaders:
• encourage the older swimmers to include the younger ones in
some relays or to mentor activities. have 15- to 16-year-olds talk to
younger swimmers about a race or fun season they may have just
had.
• create opportunities for members to give back to the program. this
is a win-win situation. It gives the younger swimmers role models
to look up to and helps the older swimmers celebrate their success.
It helps foster self-esteem all the way around.
• Use lane leaders, age-group leaders, captains, and stroke leaders to
help encourage, cheer for, and celebrate success daily. allow them
to lead stretching or warm-ups, choose the drill to use that day, or
be captains of relays.
• create an environment in which athletes begin on time and work
hard, and thank those who lead the way in these areas.
Planning for Growth
Swimmers like patterns to their training. have a daily, a weekly, and
a season plan. explain it to all team members and to parents of a club
team. respect the beginning and ending time of practices. Use the last
five minutes to celebrate what has been learned or accomplished and
to cool down.
as I plan each season I look at what I want to have happen at the end
of the season, and then go back and set it up from the beginning. Begin
with the end in mind. I think about the types of things we want to say
at our end-of-the-season banquet, at Ncaas, at the Big ten champion-
ships, at dual meets, at the training trip, and so on. I encourage our staff
and our student-athletes to do the same. this helps to make each season
20

--- Page 35 Text ---
Putting Fun Into the Swimming Experience
fresh and acts as a stepping-stone to a solid season.
I hope you can take an idea or two from this chapter to help your ex-
perience and your team members experience with the sport as enjoyable
for you as it has been for me. enjoy the rest of the journey!
Summary
• Fun is one of the most important reasons that young swimmers first
join a swim team.
• Fun, enthusiasm, attitude, and self-esteem are interrelated.
• communication is critical at all levels—coach, swimmer, and par-
ents.
• create opportunities to help define the passions of your swimmers
and to keep your program challenging and fun.
• each practice should have a clear purpose and plan that is evalu-
ated continually so the next day is even better.
• coaches must be aware of the developmental issues facing each age
group and must understand that fun is age specific.
• create rewards appropriate to the age group.
• as the swimmers get older and better, turn the training into a
game.
• emphasize winning and learning, as opposed to winning and los-
ing.
• Fear is natural and must be met head on.
21

--- Page 37 Text ---
c h a p t e r t h r e e
Coaching
With Integrity
peter Daland

--- Page 38 Text ---
Daland
One of several definitions of integrity by Webster (Merriam-Webster’s
Collegiate Dictionary, 10th edition) is “firm adherence to a code . . . of
moral . . . values.” For this chapter I make use of this definition since it
fits in well with the role of the swim coach.
We live in a world of declining moral values. people today no longer
hold the high standards of personal and group behavior that guided
past generations. this would appear to be especially true in the United
States. although it can be observed in most aspects of life, nowhere is
this decline more evident than in the world of sport, even in swimming.
however, coaches in our sport are in a position to take action to counter-
act this decline by showing integrity in all that they say and do.
Since the Viet Nam War and the student unrest of the 1960s, there have
been major changes in popular behavior and lifestyles, in america and in
other western countries, that discourage personal and group discipline.
this has made the relationships of individuals and teams in sport more
difficult. In an activity such as competitive swimming that requires hard
training, commitment, and a strong work ethic, the attempts of youth to
challenge or disregard adult authority create tension and conflict. this
could well be one of several reasons for the decline over the last two
decades in both the numbers and the quality of swimmers who stay
committed to the sport.
Building Coaching Relationships
coaching is a profession of relationship building. Successful relation-
ships depend heavily on the integrity of the involved parties: the coach-
ing staff, the athletes, the athletes’ parents, the officials, and at times, the
coaching staff of other teams. the individual integrity of each of these
parties forms the basis of their ability to work together. If the connections
among any of those involved fail, the whole structure may collapse. the
work of a coach is full of relationship pitfalls that must be avoided if
the team is to have success.
a coach’s high personal moral standards are absolutely essential in
building a team operation that can achieve long-term success. Without
strong personal integrity, the coach cannot gain the respect of the swim-
mers and the team supporters necessary for putting together the strong
relationships that lead to team success.
the cornerstone of a strong swim program is a coach with integrity.
the coach, in turn, must appoint staff and find athletes who possess this
same quality. If this process is carried out successfully, a fine team will
develop. Moral fiber and a strong work ethic probably have more to do
with success in swimming than does pure talent.
24

--- Page 39 Text ---
Coaching With Integrity
Wholly Coached
Shane Gould
The coaches I had as a teenage swimming champion nearly 30 years ago are rarely
surprised when I tell them how much of an influence they had on my life. The time
they spent with me at the pool during training and swim meets, the hours they took
to discuss my technique, my motivation for swimming, and my goal-setting strategies,
and the life instruction they offered made them nearly as influential as my parents.
The coaches who guided me as a young swimmer taught me that being involved in
swimming was an asset I’d benefit from for life.
The legendary Forbes Carlile was my main coach as a teenage swimmer. He was a
superb role model. An expert in the ability to physiologically train swimmers to swim
fast, he served as a communicator, a mentor, and a teacher to his swimmers. The way
he coached not only developed strong swimmers, it made well-rounded individuals of
these swimmers.
If I had the chance to choose a swim coach now, knowing what I do as an Olympic
athlete, a mother of four grown children, and a swim coach, I would look for a coach
with many of the same qualities that I experienced in my coaches.
My ideal coach would be knowledgeable about how to train swimmers to swim
fast.
He would be able to make a realistic evaluation of his swimmers’ potential.
He would help his swimmers take responsibility for their training by expecting them
to be ready on time for practices and competitions and to be independent enough to
train without him for a period of time.
He would keep records of swimmers practices, including heart rates, lactic acid
levels, and intervals done and would design a suitable program for each swimmer. He
would eventually have swimmers take responsibility for some of their own record-keep-
ing.
He would arrange time for his swimmers to do cross training and other activities
to further develop their core strength outside of the pool and to maintain variety in
their workouts.
My ideal coach would serve as a mentor to her swimmers.
She would be a role model for lifelong fitness and good health and would swim
herself for the sheer love of it.
She would take an interest in her swimmers’ lives outside of swimming. She
would ask her swimmers how they were doing at school and encourage them to put
effort into their studies and brainwork.
She would support her swimmers’ interest and involvement in other activities as
well, especially those activities that help a swimmer develop the skills and confidence
to take initiative, be creative, and discover new things—opportunities elite athletes miss
out on when their lives are ordered and directed solely by training and competing.
(continued)
25

--- OCR from Page 39 Image 1 ---
Wholly Coached

--- Page 40 Text ---
Daland
Wholly Coached, continued
My ideal coach would be a teacher to his swimmers.
He would give feedback appropriate to each swimmer’s age and ability. He
wouldn’t tell a 10-year-old after she’d won at a local meet that she could be a gold
medal Olympian one day. He would, however, get her interested in the Olympics by
encouraging her to watch the performances of the Olympians and would point out the
great commitment they’d made to attain the highest level of competition.
He would praise his swimmers when they clocked a personal best time and
analyze with them what they did right to achieve the personal best.
He would also take time to discuss with his swimmers a race in which they didn’t
swim their best, so that they could learn from mistakes and continue to improve. But
he would never throw away a 12-year-old’s silver medal because he wanted gold.
He would arrange for his swimmers to practice receiving medals graciously and
giving speeches. He would also have a lending library of motivational and relaxation
tapes.
She would initiate open communication with swimmers and parents.
She would make it easy for her swimmers to accept criticism by always referring to
the swimming rather than the swimmer. (“Your kicking needs some extra work, Shane,”
not, “Shane you’re still a hopeless kicker.”)
She would set up a good relationship with the parents of the swimmers and
would never make a decision about a swimmer’s future without talking it over with the
parents first.
When a swimmer was old enough and competing at the national or international
level she would recommend a good manager who would instruct the swimmer in fi-
nancial management of prize money and sponsorships earnings. She would assist the
club swimmer with college scholarship opportunities.
My ideal coach would emphasize teamwork and would look for ways to build team
unity.
He would encourage his swimmers to enjoy the delights of swimming. He would
ask how each swimmer felt in the water and give swimmers the goal of getting into
the zone. He would allow them to joke and laugh and enjoy the other swimmers’
companionship, but expect them to listen when he gave instruction. He would create
some of the fun and have a good sense of humor.
He would develop a good team ethic with the ethos of competing for the good
of the team rather than just as individuals.
He would have the swimmers help out at club meets with timing or putting equip-
ment away, having older swimmers help coordinate the younger ones. Because elite
sport requires a certain degree of selfishness to meet individual training and competition
goals, doing things for others helps swimmers keep a better balance between giving
and taking.
The best coaches aspire to fulfill all of these roles and duties. Although they may
never completely achieve this goal—perfection is as elusive to coaches as it is swim-
mers—they never cease striving to do so. This is the kind of coach I gained the most
from, the kind of coach I want to be, and the kind of coach I challenge you to be—for
26

--- OCR from Page 40 Image 2 ---
Wholly Coached, continued

--- Page 41 Text ---
Coaching With Integrity
appearance helps to convey this integrity. therefore, the coach must
dress for the role and the situation. Sloppy, inappropriate attire can
damage a coach’s image with his or her pupils as well as with others.
For example, a professional coaching conference is not the place to wear
pool-deck attire. It will likely damage your image as a professional and
invite disrespect.
The Coach-Swimmer Relationship
In order for coaches to lead swimmers to higher levels of performance,
the team must become a solid unit under the leadership and guid-
ance of the coaching staff. the swimmers and the coach must adopt a
strong work ethic. the coach must become a role model, admired and
respected by the swimmers. he or she must always be well prepared at
team meetings and practices. even though the best coaches are close to
their squad members, they remain a step ahead of them. Where there
is responsible and caring leadership, there will likely be a happy and
successful team.
there are some difficult hurdles along the way to higher performance.
however, if the coach displays integrity, intelligence, and patience solu-
tions can be found. It is the work of the coach to lead his or her pupils
along a high moral path and to help them to sort out the many conflicting
elements in their lives. the coach must teach that sport should be part
of life but should not be life itself. Studies, family, sports, and a social
life must all find their proper place and priority in the life of the swim-
mer. During the student years, studies must come first. the coach must
also emphasize the value of the team experience and encourage giving
to others in order to build a strong team unit.
a lack of self-confidence is a common problem in young swimmers.
With the cooperation of the parents and some individual attention from
the coach, this condition can often be corrected. One of the best ways
a coach can help is to keep affected athletes busy with other activities
at meets, such as taking splits or leading cheers, so that they aren’t left
alone to think too much about the competition. a coach might also con-
sider shortening the taper of these athletes to keep them more optimistic
about their chances for success. Swimmers who lack self-confidence
sometimes believe that they are getting out of shape during an extended
taper period.
Some coaches find it challenging to treat all athletes on a team—faster
and slower swimmers—equally, but a coach with integrity must accord
slower swimmers the same status as the top performers and must give
all swimmers the same amount of attention. this is necessary so that
27

--- Page 42 Text ---
Daland
every swimmer feels like a part of the team. Otherwise the team is re-
duced to being a club for a few exceptional swimmers, and the slower
athletes feel excluded from the team experience. More often than not,
the less talented swimmers will gain more from being on the team than
the others.
Drug and alcohol use is a problem that sometimes affects young adult
swimmers. these substances pose a challenge for a coaching staff to
address. In this area as in others, coaches must be role models and lead-
ers for their swimmers. coaches of high integrity cannot ignore habits
of self-destruction in their athletes. they must establish and enforce a
strong drug and alcohol use policy; otherwise whatever integrity the
team may have possessed will be lost.
The Coach-Parent Relationship
In any successful club operation, there must be a strong and positive
connection between the coach and the team parents. In order to gain
the cooperation and support of the parents, a coach must make it clear
that he or she will be a positive moral influence on the children. the
coach must sell the parents on the many benefits that the program will
bring to their children, in and out of the pool; however, he or she must
demonstrate personal integrity in order to make the sale. If parents can
see that their children will grow in a positive manner through working
with the coach, then they will strongly support the club program.
a common problem for many coaches is what to do about overeager
team parents who push their children too hard and too frequently. In
most cases swimmers with such parents will drop out of the sport un-
less prompt action is taken by the coach to correct the situation. In try-
ing to alter a family connection, a coach must proceed with caution. a
simple and often effective solution is to find a job for overeager parents
that will benefit the team, such as newsletter editor, fund-raising chair,
or meet official—timer, deck official, starter, referee. this kind of job
enables the parent to see the larger team view and should therefore
ease the pressure on his or her own child. Some years ago, a very fine
university and national team masseur was developed from an overeager
club team parent.
another parent-coach problem that can arise concerns the running of
the swim club. Very few parent-run clubs have ever been successful in
top-level competition. Such clubs are usually handicapped by numer-
ous firings and resignations of coaches. too-frequent coaching changes
damage the team, causing many swimmers to transfer to other clubs with
more stable coaching leadership.
28

--- Page 43 Text ---
Coaching With Integrity
If the coach wisely steers team parents away from the technical end of
swimming and toward the business end of the club, the club will benefit
greatly. It is the obligation of the coach to handle technical issues and
to represent the club in federation meetings. this should not be handed
over to team parents who lack the knowledge to decide what is best for
the club and the sport. the integrity, knowledge, and wisdom of the
coach must be utilized in order for the club to succeed.
The Coach-Official Relationship
In working with meet or governing-body officials, the coach must act
with strong integrity. remember that officials are present at competition
to ensure that the events are conducted in a fair and equitable manner
for all competitors. a coach’s reactions to decisions that are favorable
or unfavorable to his or her team are observed by other coaches, team
members, team supporters and parents, the officials, and others. the
coach’s integrity is on public display at such moments. a coach must be
aware of this, react carefully, and avoid unsporting behavior. If it appears
that a wrong ruling was made by an official, then the written protest
procedure should be followed with as little fuss as possible.
coaches should do their best to see that team members and supporters
treat officials appropriately. the coach should educate team members
and parents on the basic rules of competition so that they can better
understand the sport and can avoid unnecessary disqualifications. Some
team followers and parents may even decide to become officials to better
serve the club and the sport.
The Coach-Coach Relationship
One of a coach’s most important connections is with other coaches.
Integrity is absolutely essential in dealing with one’s peers. the most
permanent people in swimming are the coaches. Swimmers and officials
come and go, but the coaches remain because it is their profession. What
your fellow coaches think of you will have an important impact on your
professional life.
coaches should help their fellow coaches whenever possible. they
should assist in the training and education of younger, developing coach-
es. Mentor programs can and should be of great benefit to all involved.
It is vital for coaches to be gracious in victory and dignified in defeat.
Win or lose, be tactful and compassionate. compliment other coaches
on their victories and make no excuses for your losses. In and out of
competition, always be courteous and friendly to rival coaches.
Recruiting With Integrity
29

--- Page 44 Text ---
Daland
recruiting swimmers from other teams is almost always a source of
trouble for all concerned. the exception to this is, of course, a college
or university coach recruiting a high school senior or a junior college
student. the accepted, normal procedure for moving to the next level
in sport is seldom problematic. Other situations are rarely simple and
often not correct.
an athlete’s changing from one high school to another should not be
complicated, because place of residence usually determines which school
a student attends. however, if coaches encourage a change of residence,
they are not showing integrity even though they may be within the rules.
If they use swimmers or team parents to do this work for them, they are
just as guilty.
encouraging a transfer from one university or college to another for
other than academic reasons is uncommon because of the Ncaa transfer
rule, which requires a transferring student-athlete to sit out a year before
competing unless the coach of the original institution signs a release.
Such transfers still reflect low integrity if the coach of the receiving
institution is involved in the athlete’s decision to transfer.
at the club level, USa Swimming has instituted the 120-day transfer
rule, which prevents an athlete from participating immediately after a
transfer, but the time period specified is really too short to serve as a
deterrent. Only coaches with strong integrity will be able to keep their
fingers out of this pie.
Serving as a Coach-Administrator
part of the work of the best swim coaches today involves playing a part
in the administration of swimming. as with all other aspects of coaching,
this side of the profession requires people of high integrity. It means going
to meetings and serving on working committees at the club, high school,
or university level. the work calls for an additional time commitment to
the sport and is often unpaid. It requires knowledge of and concern for
the sport. If swimming is going to be well run, then the leading coaches
must play a key role in its administration.
One of the main frustrations encountered by coaches in swimming
administration is the lack of technical knowledge and understanding on
the part of the noncoach administrators. In such cases coaches must be
patient and helpful. this too is a part of coaching with integrity.
Summary
30

--- Page 45 Text ---
Coaching With Integrity
• coaching depends on integrity in relationships among coaches,
athletes, parents, and officials.
• a coach provides leadership to the team through his or her integ-
rity.
• a coach’s personal integrity gains the respect of swimmers and team
supporters.
• a coach must help swimmers prioritize their activities.
• a coach should accord every team member the same status.
• a coach cannot ignore any team member’s use of drugs or alcohol;
he or she must establish and adhere to a strong policy regarding use
of these substances.
• there must be a strong and positive connection between a coach
and the team parents.
• a coach must maintain integrity in dealing with other coaches and
in recruiting swimmers.
• a coach with integrity must assume a role in the administration of
swimming.
31

--- Page 47 Text ---
Part
II
Directing a
Program to Its
Full Potential

--- Page 49 Text ---
c h a p t e r f o u r
Tailoring Your
Approach to
Specific
Competition Levels
John Leonard
Legendary swimming coach James “Doc” Counsilman providing poolside in-
struction.

--- Page 50 Text ---
Leonard
as we look across the broad landscape of world swimming, it is clear
that the most successful swimming coaches share the skill of being able
to tailor their program to the level of the athletes’ development and to
the level of competition that they will face in their present team and
positions. coaches who work with multiple skill, interest, and ability
levels are adept at changing their style and approach to fit the situation,
in some cases, hour by hour. this flexible mental approach comes from
the ability to create true empathy with the athletes in the group. this
empathy, in turn, comes from the coaches’ honest desire to serve the
needs of their athletes.
In this chapter, we look at several variations on this same theme.
first, we look at communication issues in coaching and how coaches
necessarily adapt and change to suit the different groups or competition
levels with whom they are working. Next, we discuss the changes in
the physical demands coaches make on their teams at various levels of
the sport, based on some of the characteristics of various competition
levels within swimming. finally, we paint a complete picture of highly
successful coaching behaviors at each level of the competition pyramid
(see figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1 Each level of the competition pyramid presents its own set of coaching
challenges.
36

--- OCR from Page 50 Image 1 ---
High school
arid
Senior SViMiniers

AQe-group Swiniiners

Ho yice SviMiners

--- Page 51 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
one of the most memorable examples of this “shifting” coaching behav-
ior that I have seen was the great Doc counsilman of Indiana university.
In the summer, Doc had a busy and varied schedule. at 5:30 am, he was
dealing with olympic-level athletes preparing for the most prestigious
of world events in late summer. By 9 am, he was working with high
school-age swimmers attending his swim camps, and by 11 am, he was
often working with the littlest swimmers, the 8-, 9- and 10-year-olds,
who attended the camp. clearly each group had different expectations
of the great man, as they met with him in turn, and different needs.
Doc never missed a beat, going from a congenial, collegiate coach in
the early morning, acting in concert with his senior swimmers (and, it
must be said, occasionally throwing a small bit of the dictator into the
mix for seasoning!) to a strict disciplinarian with the highest expectations
with the high school-age group, to a fun-loving, grandfatherly character
with the young children. Doc could play all the roles and he moved
seamlessly between them. he was also brilliant enough to occasionally
allow brief glimpses of who he was with the “group above” to the “group
below” so that when the group below moved up, they were not totally
shocked to discover another side of the Doc.
Communicating in Coaching
It has been wisely stated that coaching is largely a job of selling: sell-
ing your ideas to your athletes and to others, selling belief in yourself
and your system of preparation, and selling the value of our sport and
the hard work that goes into it. Selling, sales professionals are told, is
a transfer of emotion that moves a person to act. It is further stated that
people “buy” based on emotion, and then must justify their emotional
choice with objective reasoning.
the job of the salesman, therefore, is to create the emotion to move
people to action and to provide them with the objective data to justify
their choice and action to themselves, their parents, their friends, and
so on.
everyone must justify their purchases or decisions to someone. there-
fore, if one is to sell an idea to an athlete, one must communicate with
that athlete. communication, as everyone knows, takes many forms, oral
(both face-to-face and over the telephone), body language, and written.
coaches must become highly skilled communicators in whichever forms
they use.
Doc counsilman once asked a large group of coaches who would win
a swim meet if four coaches were given identical teams: a physiologist,
37

--- Page 52 Text ---
Leonard
a biomechanist, a nutritionist, or a psychologist? his answer, of course,
was the psychologist, because the psychologist could best communicate
with the team.
the most famous communicator in modern coaching is perhaps the
fabled coach of the Santa clara Swim club during the 1960s and 1970s
and later of the Stanford university swim team, George haines. George
was skilled enough to convince two or more swimmers in the same event,
on his team, that each could win, and that each could set world records.
each swimmer believed that “secretly” George was pulling for him or her
more than the others, though George would continually declare his total
impartiality. It was said that George could convince anyone of anything,
and amazing stories are told of his ability to do this at the highest level
of competition, the olympic Games. this ability made him a coach to
be feared in world competitions.
Listen
one of the most important “secrets of success” in Stephen covey’s The
7 Habits of Highly Effective People is “seek first to understand, then
later to be understood.” In coaching communication, this simple phrase
offers deep meaning.
the first critical skill in communication that every coach at every
level must learn is to listen to the athlete. coaches must listen with the
ear, the mind, and the heart. they must listen for words but also listen
for intent, for meaning, and for the emotions behind the words. repeat-
ing back to the athlete what you have heard—“may I repeat what you
just told me to be sure I have it right?”—is a good way for a coach to let
an athlete know that you have been listening and want to understand.
a final, “Is that right?” is vital to emphasize your desire to know the
athlete’s true point of view.
Listening to an 8-year-old is different, in terms of the content, mean-
ing, and emotion involved, than listening to a 25-year-old, and there are
gradations throughout the spectrum. adjust accordingly. Listening to the
little people is best done by physically getting down to an eye-to-eye
level with them, not expecting to get a “clear picture” right away, and
allowing time for these generally less expressive communicators to find
a way to tell their story.
I work to keep communication open with my swimmers every day,
rather than simply waiting for them to come to me with a problem or
issue. “What’s your story today?” is one of favorite greetings to young
people as they enter the pool. at first, they look at me blankly and say,
“What?” or tilt their heads in bemusement, but later, as I explain that
38

--- Page 53 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
everyone has a “story of the day” (or two or three!), they open up and
disclose what is important to them on that day. this usually gives great
clues about how to conduct practice effectively for a particular person
on a particular day. While the language may change, the impact of such
a short discussion on all ages is profound. this type of exchange dem-
onstrates concretely your interest in their lives, and if you take the time
to really listen, gives you real insight into their lives.
coaches must modify verbal communication in content, complex-
ity, length, and emotion depending on the age group they are working
with. they must also adjust according to the specific situation. Some
coaches think that they should never display real emotion, even when an
athlete’s behavior is inappropriate and out of line. In my view, a coach
has a deep responsibility to “set the lines” within which the team will
operate. Young people of all ages expect and want those lines; and if
they aren’t sure, they will push until they find out the hard way how far
out the boundaries are. there is nothing wrong with an occasional loud,
attention-getting, strongly-worded comment; in fact, such comments can
be very beneficial. Your team needs to know that you care. people who
care get angry once in a while—once in a while, not everyday. use your
emotions, both the joyful and the unhappy ones, sparingly. they have
more effect if not overworked and overdisplayed.
Be Aware of Body Language
Body language is another major component of communication. It is
critical that you know what you look like when you are coaching. one
of the best ways to do this is to have a friend secretly videotape you
at practices and meets, then let you review the tape in private. Most
assuredly, you will find flaws as well as good things in your physical
presentation. there is a place for active, aggressive body language with
certain teams or individuals at certain times, as well as a place for the
opposite kind of behavior. With younger, less experienced children, a
calm, peaceful atmosphere and calm, peaceful body language generally
provide the best learning environment. But that calm learning environ-
ment is not what most athletes need when the state finals come up in the
50 free in high school competition. Now is the time for arousal! Neither
limp relaxation, nor extreme tenseness will help athletes in this situa-
tion. But the presence of an eager, involved, focused, and slightly tense
coach can be a real motivator.
Send the Right Message
In the beginning levels of competition, communication must focus on
39

--- Page 54 Text ---
Leonard
the process, such that swimmers hear, “here is what you need to do
(or remember or learn) in order to improve. concentrate on doing these
things.” clarity, simplicity, and a cheerful, upbeat nature are assets when
communicating with beginning swimmers. as you climb the competitive
pyramid, the intensity level typically builds, though you must gauge
what approach is best for each individual athlete in preparation for top
competition. Some need high arousal levels; others need to stay calm.
the ability to provide different things to different athletes at high-stakes
competitions is one mark of a first-rate coach.
the great australian coach Laurie Lawrence is a poet, a writer, a pro-
fessional speaker, and one of the greatest on-deck swim meet coaches in
history. he is legendary for finding the right motivational “pitch” and
tone for each of his athletes at the olympic Games. he used an upbeat,
“Go get ‘em; you’re the best, the very best!” approach with Jonno Sieben
in Los angeles in 1984 before he upset Michael Gross to win the 200
butterfly gold medal, and at the same olympics used quiet reassurance
for some of his female stars who responded better to that approach.
Great coaches not only know their athletes and what they need but
also how to deliver their message in the form and the terms that are most
meaningful to the athletes. Delivering a verbal message to an athlete who
responds to tactile communication may not be terribly effective, but a
hug and a squeeze might get the point across.
having established that communication is the key to coaching ef-
fectively at different levels, let’s look at how coaches individualize the
physical demands of training to accommodate the different develop-
mental and competition levels of their athletes.
Differentiating Physical Training
an important job of any coach is to develop training programs that are
appropriate to the fitness and skill level of the athlete. Novice swim-
mers, age-group swimmers, high school and senior swimmers, and elite
swimmers have different needs and characteristics.
Novice Swimmers
at the base of the competition pyramid, a coach may be working with
a novice team, perhaps in a YMca setting, a park district summer club
setting, or a country club swim club setting. these athletes are typically
youngsters right out of the learn-to-swim program, with half-formed
stroke skills, a great deal of enthusiasm, and absolutely no training
background whatsoever. Working at this level of swimming, the coach
40

--- Page 55 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
concentrates on teaching skills and stroke techniques. there is little of
the real training that athletes will do later in their swimming careers.
the coach of the novice swimmer presents, teaches, and repeats many
drills to hone skills and technique, working in repeats of 121/2 or 25 yards
or meters or even shorter lengths for more complicated strokes such as
butterfly. the simple repetition of these skills and drills by themselves
not only improves stroke technique but also helps establish an athlete’s
base conditioning.
at this stage, the coach emphasizes good training skills and habits as
well as how to properly swim a practice. this work may not seem very
sophisticated, but it is truly vital for launching successful swim careers.
Novice coaches are the unsung heroes of american swimming, often
underpaid and underappreciated.
Bonnie Brown, a coach with 30 years of novice coaching experience in
Syracuse, New York, has seen her “graduates” go on to age-group top-16
rankings, Junior and Senior National time standards, and in one case,
an olympic berth. She puts it this way, “My job is to set the foundation.
I love the fact that I get to start them on the right path. If I do my job,
the job of every coach who will follow me will be so much easier and
more enjoyable. When I teach them something correctly, and it sticks,
they will never swim a length of the pool incorrectly and establish bad
habits that may never be broken. I know I do a critical job in developing
athletes for our team!”
Characteristics of Novice Swimmers
• Novice swimmers join to be with friends, to have fun, because
their parents bring them, and/or to learn something new (develop
mastery).
• parents may have either no expectations or unrealistic expecta-
tions.
• parents and athletes are likely to be unversed in youth sports and
swimming in particular.
• education of parents is crucial to the success of the program.
• typically, the athletes have low physical capacities. Some may be
frighteningly short on endurance.
• athletes will communicate in a very literal way, not knowing the
jargon of swimming, so the coach has to be very careful to be clear.
for example, you wouldn’t say, “You died on that last 25,” without
explaining the exaggerated swimming slang.
• these swimmers will consider fun to be “laughs and giggles,” not
41

--- Page 56 Text ---
Leonard
achievement and hard work.
• enthusiasm will be high. excitement will be high. they will be
rather easily motivated.
• external motivators such as ribbons and awards are highly sought-
after; their use is necessary to help develop inner drive.
• practices need to be short and fast-paced, with no one activity too
long or “boring.” creativity counts.
• attention spans are limited. teach to the point, one point at a
time.
• repeat key points each day.
Age-Group Swimmers
after coaching novice swimmers, a coach’s next assignment might be
an age-group or intermediate swim team, with members ranging from
c- and B- level swimmers to highly skilled triple a qualifiers who are
competitive nationally in their age group.
coaches of age-group swimmers must shift their approach to include
a bit more on the conditioning side of training, constantly doing daily
stroke instruction and correction, while simultaneously challenging the
group with more demanding workouts.
Gradually, progressively, increasing the physical load on the athletes
can be done in many ways. a few are listed below:
• Increase the frequency of workouts, that is, the number of days the
athlete practices each week and month.
• Increase the duration, or amount of time, in each workout.
• Increase the amount of volume, or distance covered, in each work-
out.
• Increase the density of work in the time allotted, that is, more swim-
ming, less rest built into the program, (measured by yards or meters
per hour being swum).
• Gradually increase the intensity, or speed, of the workouts done.
the toughest coaching issue with age-group teams is that the level
of swimmer in one workout will vary a great deal. each group must be
developed to have athletes of similar capabilities training together, in
the same lanes, so they can challenge and support each other’s efforts,
and can all rise together to the challenges presented by the coach. coach
Kathy McKee of Mecklenburg aquatic club in charlotte, North carolina,
is a master at providing group differentiation for her swimmers. While
42

--- Page 57 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
she currently coaches in an 8-lane pool, she has worked in a 10-lane pool
in the past, which allowed her to have as many as six slightly different
workouts going in those 10 lanes. She prefers to have assistant coaches
with her to help with the different workouts but sometimes works with
each of the different groups herself. this group differentiation allows
her to very gradually turn up the physical demands and to maintain
positive training progress for each group without overwhelming any
one swimmer.
one of the adaptations that age-group coaches introduce to their swim-
mers is the concept of dryland training, usually starting with body weight
exercises. the coach’s role in this age group is especially focused on
teaching the swimmers how to do exercises correctly with good form.
Characteristics of Age-Group Swimmers
• teams may have a large swimmer-to-coach ratio.
• teams and swimmers may show a diversity of skill levels. even
within an individual, skills may vary; a child may have a proficient
freestyle but a nonexistent breaststroke.
• “fairness” is a major issue in swimmers at this age. explore and
explain the decisions you make and the rationales you use daily.
• this group needs to understand the “why” of all things.
• physical development is better than at the novice level but must be
addressed systematically to nurture improvement. coaches need
a planned program of increasing stress at specific times for each
individual.
• Swim meets can be emotional times. athletes must understand the
appropriate time, place, and manner for handling their emotions.
• team aspects of swim meets are important to the athletes.
• Swimmers may start shifting their focus from their most significant
other, friends, or family to the coach. Swimmers find that good
coaches make loyal friends
• real awareness of training and competition times emerges at this
level, and many youngsters will take ownership of the sport for
themselves for the first time.
• Muscular and endurance development will be rapid if children
consistently come to practice. If they don’t, they will likely still
improve, just on natural growth cycles.
• adolescent hormones may create first awareness of the opposite
sex, sometimes with very distracting results.
• By the time swimmers are 8 to 10 years old, they are ready to begin
43

--- Page 58 Text ---
Leonard
to consider the mental side of peak performance.
High School and Senior Swimmers
Next in the pyramid is presenior or high school swim training. coach-
ing high school swimming is perhaps the greatest challenge in all of
american swimming because the coach works with the greatest range
of swimmer ability, from beginners just out of learning-to-swim classes
through all-american caliber swimmers.
coaches at this level will increase work on all aspects emphasized in
previous levels and add a strong dryland training component as well.
this may also be the time to include some basic sport psychology in
the form of self-directed skills. training becomes complex, with a fair
amount of work done beyond the aerobic type of training that dominates
age-group swimming. Mature body chemistry demands more complex
physical training for peak competitive performance. a complete review
of this sort of physiology is far beyond the scope of this chapter, but
suffice it to say that the coach must become more aware of the scientific
aspects of physical training, including training specificity, periodization,
and stroke mechanics.
Characteristics of High School and Senior Swimmers
• Larger bodies mean fewer swimmers per lane than with younger
teams; more safety care is needed.
• endurance needs are primary. Strength and speed needs are second-
ary.
• Swimmers at this age begin to choose what they want to eat. Nutri-
tion plays a big role in their success.
• this group feels a tremendous pressure to fit in and be part of the
group. peer pressure is enormous. Good friends are critical; friends
who lead in the wrong direction are mortally dangerous.
• athletes are generally ready for more in-depth discussion of the
mental aspects of the sport.
• Stroke-specific and event- or distance-specific training in the pool
needs to be more carefully geared toward the needs of each ath-
lete.
• Discipline is needed. female athletes tend to like parameters and
feel safe within them, while many males put on a rebellious facade,
secretly hoping to be “reined in.”
• a swimmer’s ability to work can rise to world-class levels as early
44

--- Page 59 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
as ages 11 to 12 in women and 14 to 16 in men. this is the excep-
tion, however.
• friends, peers, and confidants are very important to swimmers at
this age. the coach may take a secondary role to peers as the most
valued resource and influence.
• competition can be at all levels from the most ordinary, mundane
event to national and world-class groups in training. take care to
reinforce team unity.
• this age group really wants to be treated as adults, and deserves to
be, within the boundaries of common sense and good taste. reward
success with small praise; deal with failures by pointing out what
can be learned from them, rather than punishing athletes in any
way.
• Introduce additional dryland strength and flexibility training as well
as mental training. Include such training in practice on a regular
basis to fill the needs of swimmers at this level of competition.
Elite Swimmers
at the peak levels of competition—collegiate, national-, and interna-
tional-level swimming—the demands on the coach change again. effec-
tive coaching now depends on individualizing training to be maximally
effective within the team concept. at the truly elite World-championship
and olympic levels, coaches must be prepared to shift their approach to
something close to one-on-one coaching. although they may coach 10
to 20 athletes all together, they will have a one-to-one plan for coach-
ing each swimmer. clearly, coaching at this level is sophisticated and
demanding.
Characteristics of Elite Swimmers
• training plans must be individualized (to a great degree).
• Swimmers must participate in the planning of their training.
• Swimmers must be treated as adults who are making a choice to
participate in a very demanding activity.
• the role of the coach is as a mentor or partner with the athlete; both
parties are seeking high-level performance.
• physical and mental demands are great on the athlete. More rest
may be needed as the athlete gets older.
• competitions serve as motivators. Mastery is assumed; now it’s time
to race and reward.
• each athlete may need something different from the coach, and may
45

--- Page 60 Text ---
Leonard
need different things at different times.
• an athlete at this level is often on the border between perfect condi-
tion for racing and physical illness. the margin is thin.
• Illness equals nontraining, which equals suppressed performance
levels, which equals no reward, which equals lessened enthusiasm,
which can equal illness. Watch out for this downward spiral.
• elite athletes consume a huge chunk of pool space and time, coach’s
time, team money, and so on. If they don’t “give back” to the pro-
gram, others may feel resentful.
• fun is largely replaced by satisfaction in work well done.
• paralysis by analysis is a danger. these athletes know about the
sport; sometimes they think they know too much.
Next, let’s look at the characteristics of successful coaches working
with athletes at each level.
Characteristics of Successful Coaches
coaches at different levels of the sport of swimming face radically differ-
ent situations. thus, their skills and abilities, as well as their knowledge
base and behavior, must also be different in order to produce success.
Indeed, success itself will be defined differently at different levels. for
novice swimmers, enjoying the sport, learning new skills, and wanting
to continue mean success. at the age-group level, the mastery of skills,
learning the culture of swimming, and learning to compete are critical
success factors. at the high school and senior swimming level, competi-
tive victories and improvements in times and skills are success measures.
for elite athletes, success is lifetime-best times and performing well in
major competitions.
Coaches of Novice Swimmers
the coach of novice-level swimmers is most successful if he or she
is able to attract and retain the interest of young children. this “pied
piper” quality is easy to spot in a coach; children will gravitate toward
such a coach and literally follow him or her around, seeking attention
and approval.
these coaches are able to communicate in words and gestures that are
meaningful to new swimmers who are not familiar with swimming jar-
gon. they are friendly and open with all children, regardless of whether
the children have a background in the sport. they provide leadership to
the group. these coaches communicate with parents in an easy, friendly
46

--- Page 61 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
manner, without being dominated by them or swayed by their possibly
uninformed and unrealistic aspirations for their children. the coach
educates parents as well as athletes in the sport.
Successful coaches of novice swimmers possess the ability to be teach-
ers; they provide lessons in short, meaningful interludes and present
material in small, logical, progressions. Knowledgeable novice coaches
provide a physical development program, including both dryland and
in-the-water training, that progressively increases in challenge so that
physical conditioning improves. these coaches recognize the importance
of letting each child find and demonstrate mastery in some part of the
swimming experience, in or out of the water. Such coaches provide a
competitive experience that focuses on learning and feedback, and keeps
the “fierce competition” aspects of sport in the background.
Successful coaches of novice swimmers emphasize that working
together in a supportive team environment is the best way for a group
to improve; they stress that the improvement of other swimmers ben-
efits each individual and helps each individual improve. Moreover,
this supportive team environment teaches children that improvement
comes from hard work, attention to detail, and enthusiasm for the task
at hand. these lessons constitute the real value of the sport experience.
Satisfaction in effort and in results is a mature form of fun that novice
swimmers must learn.
Successful coaches provide suitable opportunities for their novice
swimmers to learn and grow in both directed and more free-form activi-
ties in the sport. Most practice time is devoted to structured lessons, but
time is also allowed to explore the water in a less structured manner
through games or activities with no measurement.
finally, the best coaches of novices always demonstrate their enthu-
siasm for the sport of swimming.
Coaches of Age-Group Swimmers
In addition to implementing the basic tactics of successful coaches of
novice swimmers, successful age-group coaches further develop their
swimmers by providing a well-planned progression of physical training
covering weeks, months, and years that will prepare age-group athletes
for senior swimming. these coaches educate athletes and parents on the
need for an ever-increasing commitment to training and competition in
order to be optimally successful in the sport. they emphasize that the
senior level is best reached with an approach that expands the aerobic
training base through the age-group years. they reinforce that the fastest
way to improvement in swimming is through attention to technique.
47

--- Page 62 Text ---
Leonard
Successful coaches of this competitive level must be able to organize
and effectively manage a large group of athletes. they recognize that this
is the time to develop quality feelings about the team aspect of the sport
within youngsters. these coaches allow age-group athletes some social
time and some time for peer friendships in the team environment—to
athletes at this stage the team means more than “just swimming.”
coaches of age-group athletes can be a friend to each athlete while
remaining an authority figure. they explain the logic and the “why”
behind their decisions and the work being done so that athletes become
intellectually involved in their own training to some extent. this lays
the groundwork for athletes to develop the beginnings of a peak-perfor-
mance mental process.
Coaches of High School and Senior Swimmers
the role of the coach changes a bit in coaching swimmers in their teen-
age years. at this age swimmers’ friends are their peers, and the coach
becomes more of a mentor. for this reason it’s important that the coach
act as a quality role model in all things. the most successful coaches
at this competitive level are able to subtly develop a group of positive
peers who role model for other swimmers. Being able to shape the team
environment is a great skill for coaches to develop. a coach can then
affect the culture of the group and help define what is considered “cool,”
as well as provide a vision of what is possible for the group.
the effective high school coach develops cooperative working relation-
ships with each athlete and with the team as a whole, recognizing the
swimmers’ need to be treated as adults. these coaches become skilled
at helping teenagers set goals in swimming and in life, and then at help-
ing them move from achievement-oriented goals to process-oriented
“task recognition.” they are aware of safety issues, as the teen years are
accident years, for many reasons. they become capable of recognizing
which teen problems they are competent to address and which ones
need referral to appropriate professionals.
Successful high school coaches devise training programs that can be
individually modified for optimum training. they emphasize to their
athletes the critical importance of consistent training and of “hidden”
training—what a swimmer does away from the pool dramatically affects
what he or she achieves in the pool. Many coaches also provide mental
training opportunities for athletes to learn focus, concentration, peak-per-
formance skills, and life skills that will extend far beyond swimming.
effective coaches of this level provide a disciplined, stable environ-
ment for training. they offer competitive opportunities, and they make
48

--- Page 63 Text ---
Tailoring Your Approach to Specific Competition Levels
sure that each athlete understands how to maximize those opportunities
for themselves. they help each athlete ask and answer questions such
as “Where does this meet fit into the plan for my improvement?” and
“What do I focus on and achieve here?” these coaches create chances
for athletes to demonstrate their increasing self-reliance; their goal is to
develop independent athletes, not athletes who are dependent on the
coach.
Coaches of Elite Swimmers
the coaches of experienced swimmers competing at the national and
international levels are masters in the planning of training and have
developed their technical knowledge of swimming to the highest pos-
sible level. these coaches are “consultants” for their athletes rather than
minute-to-minute “directors.” they are willing to bring in any and all
resources necessary to help an athlete improve. the support of others
is likely to be a critical success factor in any elite athlete’s success; thus
the coach of this competitive level needs to provide only as much as
the individual athlete needs. the elite coach will be a different coach
to different athletes.
In addition to being masters of swim training, the most successful
elite coaches are aware of the need for planning the “detraining” of their
athletes at the end of their swimming careers. they provide guidance
for the athletes as to what comes next.
Most coaches will coach many different levels of swimming and should
recognize that they will be asked to provide different skills and abilities
at each level. at some point in their careers, many coaches will do more
than one level of coaching simultaneously. Great coaches perform many
roles for their athletes, and they do so with grace and with a seamless
transition. We can all aspire and continuously work to reach that level
of coaching performance.
Summary
• the most successful coaches tailor their programs to the level of the
athlete they are working with and to the level of the competition
their athletes will face.
• Successful coaches are adept at changing their approach and their
style to fit the situation.
• coaching is selling; selling depends on effective communication,
both verbal and nonverbal.
49

--- Page 64 Text ---
Leonard
• Seek first to understand, by listening to your athletes, then to be
understood.
• communication must be modified to fit the age group of the audi-
ence.
• Differentiate training according to the level of your athletes.
• teaching skills effectively is critical for the coach at the beginning
levels.
• the novice coach must be able to attract young children to swim-
ming and to maintain their interest in the sport.
• as the coach moves up the developmental ladder, he or she must
focus more on the training side.
• the age-group coach must develop a long-range training plan and
maintain attention on technique.
• high school swimming usually presents the greatest range of ath-
letes.
• at peak levels of competition, the coach must employ a one-to-one
approach with each athlete.
50

--- Page 65 Text ---
c h a p t e r f i v e
Administering
and Marketing a
Winning Program
Jack Bauerle

--- Page 66 Text ---
Bauerle
When i was asked to write a chapter for this book concerning administer-
ing and marketing a winning swim program, i was surprised and very
flattered. Our program at the University of Georgia has been fortunate
enough to win two Ncaa championships, and of this i am very proud.
however, i also feel that our program still has a long way to go. Maybe
it’s because we put ourselves up against some of the best programs in
the world, those run by richard Quick (Stanford), Mark Schubert (USc),
and eddie reese (texas), to name a few. When i compare our program
with programs such as these, i feel that we still have much work to do.
But we have come a long way in achieving the goals that we set out for
ourselves in 1978, when i took over the swimming program. i don’t think
many people in the swimming world would have given us a snowball’s
chance in hades of winning an Ncaa championship when we started
out.
My first victory as a swim coach—and the first time i got thrown in the
pool by the team—was against Brenau Women’s college in Gainesville,
Georgia. it took an Sec championship some 17 years later to get me to
take another dip! i’m not sure we had championship-level success in
mind when we started, but being surrounded by very successful pro-
grams, we knew what we wanted to achieve. it has been a challenge,
but there is nothing more satisfying than working hard and achieving
your goals.
i honestly believe that if we were able to win a championship with the
humble program we started with—a horrendous facility and very little
financial support—any program in the country can win a championship.
that first year, my father funded the year-end dinner for my women’s
team because there was not enough money in the budget to finish the
year. We slept three, four, or whatever was necessary to a room on the
road to make ends meet. though i fought for a better budget every year,
i honestly felt that we were not going to receive anything until we began
to win—which proved to be the case. the University of Georgia is and
always has been a very conservative and fiscally responsible school. the
unwritten word was work hard, keep your nose clean, and the better
you do, the more the department will help you out.
it was a difficult process. Many relationships had to be fostered around
the school, among the faculty, and among the athletic board to enable
us to arrive where we are today. certainly as we finally walked into our
new facility in 1995 we felt a different kind of pressure to win than we
had known before. We stood up and did just that. i couldn’t be more
proud of our performances.
But programs should not be judged on winning national champion-
52

--- Page 67 Text ---
Administering and Marketing
ships alone. Some of the best coaches and some of the best programs
around have never won a championship; some of them may never reach
that goal. What is important is to offer athletes the best program pos-
sible. i think that it is feasible to win with above-average athletes who
work extremely hard. having a champion or two doesn’t hurt, but at
the same time there is too much emphasis on getting the best athletes
available. Some of my best swimmers were not heavily recruited. We are
fortunate to be in a sport, unlike basketball and football, where above-
average athletes can become Ncaa and USS champions. i believe that
our program is still a work in progress because i believe that it is still
not as good as it can, and i hope will, be.
Before i address how we have administered and marketed our program
for the past 21 years, i would like to mention that almost every aspect of
this program, outside of our basic hard work and tears, has been begged,
borrowed, or stolen from other programs. i am not an original thinker;
many of my so-called ideas have been taken from successful coaches
who run successful programs and lives. three people that come to
mind immediately are Dick Shoulberg at foxcatcher and Germantown
academy, who was instrumental in steering me in the right direction
and getting me started in coaching, and Jon Urbanchek at Michigan
and eddie reese at texas, who acted as mentors. Year-in and year-out,
they not only produce great swimmers but great kids. More important,
these coaches are willing to share their ideas whenever they have the
opportunity to do so. Don Gambril’s advice has also been instrumental
in some decision making along the way, even while we were competing
against one other.
administering and marketing a winning program implies that coaches
do an awful lot besides coaching. Nothing could be more true. With any
successful team, every aspect of the program must be administered to
and meticulously checked on a day-to-day basis. Because of Ncaa leg-
islation and some of the preposterous constraints it places on our sport,
the demands on our time have become even greater, and the time that
we can spend with our athletes has become even shorter. however, it is
important to remember that athletes are our first responsibility. Our com-
mitment to them is our first priority. every decision made in our program
is designed to enhance the performance of the athletes in the pool and
in the classroom, and more important, to make them more well-rounded
people by the time they leave the confines of the university.
a few key administrative and marketing related tasks that the head
coach of any program should attend to include selecting the coaching
and support staff, delegating effectively, establishing means of financial
support other than the university (such as booster clubs and endowment
53

--- Page 68 Text ---
Bauerle
scholarships), planning the structure of the season, maximizing the use
of the facility, and developing lifelong swimmers.
Assemble the Best Staff
the first responsibility of the head coach in administering a successful
swim program is to assemble the best staff—assistant coaches and sup-
port personnel—possible. Most head coaches agree that we are only as
good as our help.
collegiate coaches’ lives have become more cluttered and complicated
with the intrusion of the Ncaa into our sport; therefore, we have had to
become even more organized than ever before. assistant coaches have
become even more important in assisting the organization so that head
coaches are as accessible as possible to their athletes. this is no small
feat in this day and age; any swim coach at the Ncaa level will tell you
that the job has changed dramatically in the last five to six years.
it is most important to pick assistant coaches that you believe will
be loyal to your program. i believe loyalty is much more important in
a coach than ability. You can teach certain aspects of coaching to an
individual, but it is impossible to teach loyalty. Loyalty is innate. By
selecting people you like who are also loyal to the program, you will
receive an extra bonus of longevity. You don’t need to look far to find
some ultrasuccessful head coach–assistant coach teams whose success
has fed their longevity and whose longevity has no doubt been a big
part of their success. the first couple of examples that come to mind
are eddie reese and Kris Kubik, who have been together at texas since
1986 (and before that from 1978 to 1981); and Mark Schubert and Larry
Liebowitz, who have been at USc since 1992. at Georgia, i have been
fortunate enough to have harvey humphries with me since 1982, and
diving coach Dan Laak since 1987; i had another assistant coach with me
for 12 years. it makes me feel really good about our program to know that
my staff members have been taken care of by the program, that they have
been treated fairly, and that they have had enough responsibility to feel
that they are an integral part of the success of the program. Obviously it
is important that assistant coaches be compatible and that they reflect
the values of the head coach, both at the pool and away from the pool.
coaching staff selections also have to meet the program’s needs. You
need expertise in sprinting, distance, and middle distance. for our pro-
gram, i don’t care if this expertise comes from a woman or a man; my
desire is to find the best possible person who is available for the job.
there is no doubt that if you coach a women’s or a combined program
54

--- Page 69 Text ---
Administering and Marketing
it is important, if at all possible, to have a woman coach on staff. at the
same time, some coaches hurt their programs by hiring coaches based
more on their gender than on the expertise they can provide. Many
times our best coaches are right under our noses—our own swimmers
who become grad assistants and perhaps move on to become full-time
assistants. if you make the experience in the pool fun while coaching
your athletes, you will find that more than a few pupils will go on to
be coaches.
Meet With Staff Away From the Pool
as you work with your staff, plan some social time with them. We try
to get together as a staff, at football games or dinners or similar events,
during the course of the year. We plan some outings just so that we have
a chance to talk away from the office and pool. this brings the staff
closer and provides a chance to discuss a lot of things that would not
be addressed at the pool.
Fight for Your Coaches’ Salaries
coaching, and swim coaching in particular, has never been the most
highly paid of professions, though certainly it is among the hardest work
in sports. if we sit back and accept the salaries that are given to us year
after year, it is our own fault that we labor in poverty. None of us became
a coach to get wealthy, but we should fight to receive what we deserve.
any type of success, athletic or academic, warrants asking for more
money. the more coaches fight for good salaries, the better. the higher
the salaries go for a few coaches, the higher they will go for others.
coaches must remember that their swimmers are, for the most part,
terrific student-athletes, which makes them great ambassadors for the
school and its athletic department. this point is one that coaches can
emphasize to their athletic directors. i remember going into coach Dooley
and asking for a raise not too many years ago. he told me about his first
year back in 1963, when he was hired as the head football coach at Geor-
gia for $12,000. i didn’t want to remind him that that was 30 some years
ago, nor did i want to remind him that they gave him a 6,000-square-foot
house for $1, so i accepted what he had to offer. i do believe, however,
that if i had not gone in every few years to ask for a raise, i would not
have received more than i was first offered. if you feel that you have
done a good job, ask for what you deserve.
fight for your assistant coaches’ salaries as well. these are the people
who are going to make or break your program. if the assistant coaches’
salaries are fair, it will have a significant effect on the overall stability of
your program. Moreover, the fact that you are in there fighting for them
55

--- Page 70 Text ---
Bauerle
will mean an awful lot to your assistant coaches; it will encourage them
to do their best and to remain loyal to the program.
Delegate Effectively
Obviously it is necessary to delegate some coaching responsibilities to
your staff. as you do so, make sure that staff members take full respon-
sibility for one area of the program. Delegating in this manner allows
your members to use their expertise and to know that they are important
to the program, and it allows you to focus more specifically on the areas
you need to take care of. the following section explains how we divide
the coaching responsibilities at Georgia.
assistant coach harvey humphries has been with me for 18 years.
his main responsibility is recruiting. all the coaches assist in recruit-
ing—making calls, conducting campus visits, and so forth—but harvey
coordinates the recruiting effort and plans all the official recruiting
visits. harvey is also in charge of our USS club, the athens Bulldogs,
and all the responsibilities that go along with it—managing club train-
ing, practices, travel, pool time, and so forth. carol capitani is in charge
of team travel and budget issues with the program. Morgan Bailey is
in charge of the weight training program, the orientation session, and
handling the video equipment for taping meets and practices. finally,
Whitney hite, a graduate assistant, is an assistant to all three assistants;
he is more or less available to do whatever is necessary to help them.
assistant coaches must also delegate, or they will be inundated with
mountains of paperwork and other duties that take them away from
coaching athletes.
Dan Laak is our head diving coach. his first responsibility is, of
course, to have a successful diving program. however, because diving
coaches have fewer athletes than other head coaches, they often assume
other responsibilities. Because swimming and diving programs spend
so much time together, it is important that the programs work together.
Dan sees his responsibilities as lying not only with his divers but with
the program as a whole. i have been fortunate to have in Dan not only a
well-respected diving coach who does a great job with our athletes but
also one of the best organizers in the college ranks. Dan was the meet
director for the Ncaa championships. he is in charge of meet manage-
ment, works closely with me in scheduling meets, and acts as a liaison
between me and the people in charge of the aquatic facility
although the strength and conditioning coaches are not my direct
assistants, they are integral to the overall success of the program. it is
56

--- Page 71 Text ---
Administering and Marketing
very important that great communication be established between the
strength coaches and the rest of the program.
every program has some coaches who are better communicators and
some who are more technically oriented. it is imperative that each coach
find a place within the program where he or she feels comfortable. at
the same time, young coaches need to learn a little bit about all aspects
of the program, so we make sure that all coaches visit and assist with
every area of the program, including distance, middle distance, iM, and
the sprint group.
One thing i demand from our staff is that they not go home imme-
diately following the conclusion of a home swim meet. We sit down
together after every home meet and discuss how it went. We go over
all the races and talk about how each swimmer performed. We try to
get a general feel of where we are at that point in the season and what
things we need to address at the next practice and during the next week
in training. this discussion is crucial, because it puts everyone on the
same page. it gives everyone a clear idea of where the team is headed
and how each coach feels about the performance of particular athletes
and the team in general. More often than not, we all go out somewhere
after the meet or grab a meal. this is invaluable time, as it gives us a
chance to discuss our athletes in a relaxed environment away from the
office, without interruption and without being rushed.
considering all the people within the university environment that
are there to help, coaches would be remiss not to take full advantage of
their support. here at the University of Georgia, after a 16-year battle, we
have finally received our own secretary for swimming. this allows me
the opportunity to stay on top of many jobs that i might otherwise let go,
such as communication with recruits, boosters, and parents. Good sport
information personnel are invaluable as well; they can organize publicity
meetings, newspaper and television interviews, and write a large portion
of the material that goes directly to the media. this position has been a
bone of contention for me for many years, as there seems to be a terrific
turnover from one year to the next and we are in a continual process of
educating the latest person assigned to our program. the more success-
ful a program becomes, the more important it is to have competent sport
information personnel. Bring a sport information contact along on as
many away meets as possible so that they are familiar with the athletes
as well as the coaches. include them in year-end banquets and see that
they receive any year-end awards other program members receive so
that they know they are appreciated. they will work that much harder
for you the next year.
57

--- Page 72 Text ---
Bauerle
i put other people to work for our program, including athletes who
are on fifth-year scholarship aid. athletes who are finishing a degree are
allowed by Ncaa rules to receive the same percentage of scholarship
they were awarded during the course of their eligibility, in some cases
more if they performed at a very high level. We use our fifth-year people
to help out in every way we can think of; they film meets, help out at
home meets, and coach a masters/faculty team during the lunch hour.
athletes who receive an athletic scholarship for their fifth year should
earn it by contributing as much as they can to the program.
another very important contributor to our success as a program is our
academic counseling department. it is imperative that competent people
are in place in this department. i am careful to listen to the athletes re-
garding their academic counseling and tutoring, and have come to real-
ize that if they are not comfortable with certain academic counselors, i
need to address the situation promptly. academic counselors work very
closely with our athletes. they help with scheduling conflicts, tutoring,
and monitoring grades throughout the semester. Most important, they
keep us informed of the progress—or the lack of progress—of each athlete
over the course of the year.
Last but not least, the promotions department contributes by drum-
ming up public support for the program. the University of Georgia’s
promotions department does a great job in promoting our team, putting
up swimming and diving posters around town, posting flyers, distribut-
ing schedule magnets, and introducing the team to the crowd at events
such as home basketball games.
Establish Other Means of Support
i am sure there isn’t a program in the country that is completely satisfied
with the budget it receives. there are many ways to bolster the financial
standing of a program. Booster clubs can do wonders in easing some of
the financial burdens on a team. Since swim programs don’t have the
same resources as, for example, football and basketball, even $1,000 can
make a very big difference in providing a winning environment. Booster
clubs can raise money to help pay for such things as awards banquets
and equipment, and they can make athletes feel “well taken care of.” if
the athletes are treated in a first-class manner, they are more likely to
give first-class performances in the pool.
Booster clubs are without question time consuming, but they are
extremely helpful in promoting and supporting the program. they can
greatly impact your ability to raise money for endowment scholarships.
58

--- Page 73 Text ---
Administering and Marketing
Our club, the UGa Swim club, consists of alumni, alumni parents, cur-
rent parents, and some friends of the program. each year the club raises
an extra $30,000 to help our program. Our booster club has become very
important to us; because of its success we have increased our fan support
and have found it increasingly easy to raise money every year.
this brings us to another very important aspect of sports that needs to
be addressed: endowment scholarships. head coaches must realize that
part of their role is that of businessperson. it is crucial that swimming
and diving programs—especially men’s programs, given the recent cuts
in several men’s programs across the country due to title iX compli-
ance—are secure in the years to come. We have to work on taking the
grandest burden away from overextended athletic departments, namely
the money given to scholarships.
By the time this book is published, one-third of our scholarships will
be endowed. this achievement is the result of many, many hours of work
and is something we are quite proud of. in raising money for scholar-
ships, it is important to pinpoint your “heavy hitters”— individuals on
the athletic board, successful ex-swimmers, friends of the program, and
others who have an interest in swimming or in your athletic department
and who also have the means to donate sizable sums of money. We have
tried to be very aggressive in our efforts to secure money for endowment
scholarships because these scholarships will help ensure that the swim-
ming program here stays in good standing for a long time to come.
Plan a Structure for Your Season
the structure of each season definitely contributes to the overall success
of the program. for the most part, dual meets should meet the needs of
the team. as your team gets better, be sure to challenge the team with
superb competition even if they think they cannot win. eddie reese
was instrumental in the success and rise of our men’s team, as he was
willing to bring in his texas team to swim us at a time when the other
powerhouses would not. i am thankful to him because although we
didn’t offer much of a challenge those first few years, the meets with
texas brought out the very best in our kids; they were extremely excited
to race swimmers of that caliber. those better performances fueled my
team’s confidence and allowed us to become stronger.
there should be one meet on the schedule that you probably won’t win
and a few meets that you are not sure of. at the same time there should
be some meets that you know you can win so you can move swimmers
around to events that they wouldn’t normally win or even swim. the
59

--- Page 74 Text ---
Bauerle
schedule should also be different each year. variety is good for a team,
and a change of scenery doesn’t hurt either.
as coach of a combined men’s and women’s program, i like to sched-
ule some solo meets so that the women’s team and the men’s team can
establish their individual identities. Solo meets also provide coaches of
combined programs the chance to be with 25, rather than 50, athletes for
the weekend. We also try to schedule back-to-back meets during the sea-
son to help prepare athletes to swim three-day championship meets.
in the last six weeks of training there has to be a definite separation of
the women’s team from the men’s team. it is important to do things dif-
ferently for each team. Men and women generally need different types of
work going into the last few weeks. it is quite difficult to hit both groups
right on with the taper. if you have the guts to do a little separating at
that time, your efforts will be rewarded.
Maximize Your Facilities
Many coaches feel handcuffed by their available facilities. certainly
we were in this position at the University of Georgia until 1996. at no
point in time, however, should poor facilities ever be an excuse for the
performance of the team. Such facilities are certainly a detriment to
recruiting, though. Once upon a time we tried valiantly to get through
our recruits’ official 48-hour visit without showing them the pool; now
we make our new facility the first stop on the tour.
Leaving our old facility couldn’t have come soon enough. it was losing
water. it was somewhat tilted. it was gray and dank. But it was home
and we tried to keep it up as much as possible, though no one else on
campus seemed to care about it. i knew it was a bad sign that a hawk
came flying in one of the end doors one afternoon, picked up a rat (we
had a few of those around), and dropped it into lane three next to one
of our swimmers. thankfully this was near the end of our term and we
were getting out of there in a matter of weeks. Still a pool is a pool, and
if people don’t believe that, they should go to Germantown academy
to see the remarkable job that Dick Shoulberg has done with a six-lane
pool. With a lot of imagination and hard work, he consistently produces
some of the best national-class swimmers, in a place that some people
could not even imagine being able to work in.
No matter what situation you’ve inherited, make improvements, mi-
nor or major. it took almost 10 years of politicking and getting the right
people working for us to make our new facility a reality. if indeed you
find yourself in a situation where a new facility is in the works, take
60

--- Page 75 Text ---
Administering and Marketing
the time to involve yourself in as many aspects of the process as you
can, so that the design—including the pool, the general look, the seat-
ing, the locker rooms, separate meeting rooms, the coaches’ offices, and
so forth— suits your team. it is time very well spent. i will say that it
is like having another job, and the responsibility is as grand as you can
imagine, as your greatest fear is someone walking into the pool 10 years
from now and asking: “Who was the idiot that planned this?” i asked
for as much help as possible. Go see other facilities and talk with the
coaches who have been working in some of the better facilities in the
country. the opportunity to help design the facility that your program
will be living in for the next 20, 30, or perhaps even 50 years, must be
taken advantage of. there are many stories attached to our old Stege-
man pool, and it took a lot of extra work and maintenance, but here in
our new pool i don’t have to touch even one little gadget, except maybe
the pace clocks. i do continue the tradition of having the swimmers do
the lane lines, and i think i that will always be the case, to keep them a
little less spoiled.
We currently have one of the top facilities in the country, and we do
not take this for granted. But remember that the ability to use a facility
when you want, and in the manner you want, is as important as having
a nice facility. We have fought some tough battles here to get clearance to
use this facility in the manner that we desire, but we have finally come
out on top. if you find yourself in a situation that is incompatible with
your needs, at no point in time should you settle. fight for your athletes,
if necessary, to get the pool time, to be able to host the meets you want,
and to be able to access the facilities at the times that are best for your
athletes. toward this end it helps to have a good working relationship
with the management. We try to include management in as many aspects
of the program as we can, and we distribute t-shirts, hats, and such to
let them know that we appreciate their cooperation.
Develop Lifelong Swimmers
Our USS club (the athens Bulldogs Swim club) has produced some
great success stories, and it offers assistant coaches the opportunity to
make more money and to hone their skills with athletes outside the col-
legiate arena. the USS club also serves as a viable program for athletes
who need to remain at school and train during the summer. in the last
nine years we have had an Ncaa champion, a four-time US National
champion, an Ncaa all-american, and an Ncaa honorable Mention
all-american—four athletes who have contributed greatly to the suc-
61

--- Page 76 Text ---
Bauerle
cess of our college program—come out of our local program. the USS
club also provides a solid support base of parents who are interested in
swimming and willing to help financially as well as by volunteering at
meets and so forth.
it is a wonderful but complicated (due in large part to the inordinate
amount of restrictions imposed by the Ncaa) time in collegiate swim-
ming. We have the chance to coach young people in the best of all
settings, while they are still forming their identities and building their
lives. there is much satisfaction and fulfillment in coaching, but we
have to be organized in order to accomplish the task at hand—to be the
best possible coach for the athletes that are with us, the athletes that we
recruited to our program. Organization is the key to providing the best
possible environment for our athletes, and it enables us to live up to our
commitment to coaching these young people well.
i hope the information in this chapter sheds a little light on the admin-
istration of a swim program. Maybe the most important item to remember
is this: there are no limitations on the hours we spend coaching. We have
to be willing to work as long and as hard as necessary to be successful.
Swimming continues to become more competitive. there are more good
coaches. there are more people willing to do the hard work. the job is
not done until it is done; if you work hard you can demand the same
level of effort and performance from your assistant coaches as well as
from your athletes.
Success comes step by step. assess after each year, figure out what can
be done better, and address issues head on. But let us not forget how im-
portant it is to enjoy what we are doing and to enjoy the athletes around
us on a daily basis. Keep priorities in the correct order, with athletes
holding the highest place on the list. if all efforts in the program are made
by putting the athletes’ concerns first, the program will be successful in
winning or in producing quality student-athletes—or better yet, both.
Summary
• Offer the best program possible, and winning will become pos-
sible.
• a good program is always a work in progress.
• athletes are the first responsibility in a successful program.
62

--- Page 77 Text ---
Administering and Marketing
• administering a program goes beyond coaching.
• the head coach must assemble the best staff possible and select as-
sistants who will be loyal to the program. Loyalty is more important
than ability.
• Delegate responsibilities and allow your assigned staff full respon-
sibility for their respective duties.
• communicate with your swim staff as well as with the strength
coaches, sport information personnel, and academic counselors
who are vital for the success of the program.
• evaluate all meets immediately after the competition. all staff
members need to take part in the evaluation.
• Booster clubs can do wonders for your team.
• the structure of each season contributes to the success of the pro-
gram.
• each year’s schedule should provide some variety.
• the facility you have available should never be an excuse for the
performance of the team.
• there is no limit on the hours a coach must work in order to be
successful.
• evaluate your program at the end of the each season. See that it
stays a work in progress.
63

--- Page 79 Text ---
c h a p t e r s i x
Developing a
Successful Team
skip Kenney

--- Page 80 Text ---
Kenney
When a swimmer steps up on the blocks to compete, he or she is the
ultimate master of his or her destiny. the moment of truth is revealed
once the starting gun sounds, a moment when the athlete is in complete
isolation from external help, relying only on strength, intellect, and de-
sire. there are no coaches to shorten the distance of the race, no parents
to mend bruised egos, and no teammates to make up for a lack of effort.
the distance is constant, the time absolute. No one else can swim the
race. From a performance perspective, swimming is an individual sport.
similarly, during training, nobody else can take a stroke for the indi-
vidual. the pain is his or hers alone to embrace and master. however, the
sport of swimming has adopted a training environment that is based on
a team structure—a collection of athletes and coaches working together
to optimize individual performances. consequently, what culminates
as the effort of one athlete begins with effort of many.
By training and competing within the context of an efficient team
environment, individual athletes in sports such as swimming are able
to perform at a higher level than if they were to train alone. therefore,
coaches and athletes alike are challenged to create and sustain the team
chemistry and dynamics that will improve individual performance. By
identifying the benefits of team training and competition, coaches and
athletes may be better able to develop the kind of team that improves
individual performance.
The Benefits of Team Training
While numerous benefits exist, the collective bond, mutual learning op-
portunities, and competitive challenge are three key characteristics of a
positive team dynamic that can improve individual performance.
Collective Bond
When individual athletes train together for a team, a social network is
created. if this social network is cultivated carefully, it can have a pro-
found impact in assisting each athlete. By joining a team, every individual
automatically has something in common with every other team member.
the team itself serves as a shared identity and creates a bond among
members. the standard uniform, the team colors, the mascot, and even
the group slang contribute to a sense of camaraderie.
But it is the shared experience of training together, of pounding out
mind-numbing yardage while enduring physical and mental anguish,
that forges the real bond among swim teammates. this powerful bond
motivates athletes to succeed for the sake of their teammates. through
66

--- Page 81 Text ---
Developing a Successful Team
self-sacrifice and hard work, every individual can contribute to the im-
provement of the team as a whole.
coupled with team identity and culture, the team bond generated
from shared experience is an extremely intense motivating factor. if an
athlete were to train alone, there would be no special bond to rekindle
the spirit during hard times. When workouts are difficult and a team
member is having trouble succeeding, the social network of a team can
provide support to help him or her push past the difficulty. alone, the
athlete might be likely to weaken and give in to the hardship. through
the collective experience of team training, an athlete is less likely to feel
self-pity during intense training because others are enduring the same
difficulties. the social network of a team presents each individual with
the opportunity to observe and to feel connected to others.
Mututal Learning Opportunities
Both in and out of the pool, a team provides opportunities for the athletes
to learn from one another. More often than not, the habits of successful
athletes transcend the swimming pool and locker room; the same traits
that are applied in the arena of sport are displayed in the classroom, in
the office, and in the home. time and time again, champions in the pool
succeed out of the pool. essentially, they have become 24-hour athletes,
always applying winning habits to the game of life.
in a team environment, individuals are exposed to and are able to learn
from the success of others. some athletes on a team may lead by example
in constantly applying an unyielding work ethic. the team structure
provides an opportunity for others to model the behavior of a swimmer
who consistently puts in outstanding effort, day in and day out. Other
athletes may display perfect technique, or positive attitudes, or simply
inspiration. Whatever it may be, each team member has something to
contribute to the learning environment, directly or indirectly. Due to the
competitive nature of athletics, the learning opportunities on a team also
foster a healthy competitive environment. When a teammate succeeds
in training, others will want to match or better his or her efforts.
Competitive Challenge
the competitive atmosphere of team training is a perfect opportunity
for individual athletes to push themselves to do their best. an integral
part of team training includes simulated competition, an opportunity
for athletes to go head-to-head and compete with one another. While
success in individual sports is often measured in seconds, meters, or
points, victory is not assured without outpacing the competition.
in addition to learning how to perform, athletes must learn how to
67

--- Page 82 Text ---
Kenney
win. competition within a team environment instills winning habits.
in essence, competition within a team provides a dress rehearsal for the
times when an athlete must step up to the real event. team competition
provides athletes with both physical and psychological competitive
training. considering that an athlete must be sound in both mind and
body to win, approaching psychological training with the same intensity
used in physical training is essential. competition among teammates
provides this intense training on a daily basis, something training in
isolation simply cannot do.
The Coach’s Role in Team Dynamics
While there are many more benefits to training for an individual sport
within a team framework, these benefits can only be derived from a posi-
tive team environment. a negative team dynamic holds very few advan-
tages over individual training and at times can even be detrimental to
performance. the responsibility for establishing positive team dynamics
and chemistry falls mostly on the shoulders of the coach. coaches exert
a profound impact on the success of a team. as an example, the recent
success of the National Basketball association champion Los angeles
Lakers is largely attributed to head coach phil Jackson. after establishing
a winning legacy with the chicago Bulls, Jackson took over a talented
but fragmented Los angeles team in dire need of leadership and guided
them to a championship in his first season there.
Because of the magnitude of influence coaches have on team chemistry
and success, they must consider and bring into play several factors in
building a positive team environment. strong leadership, group com-
munication, and individual accountability can help to build a positive
team dynamic that will enhance individual performance.
team leadership from both the coaches and team members is essen-
tial. certainly a coach must provide leadership to his or her athletes by
establishing procedures and boundaries, and by modeling the kind of
behavior he or she expects from the athletes. But if a coach can iden-
tify other individuals with leadership potential and can place them in
positions where they can lead their teammates, this will also help to
ensure that the positive benefits of a team structure are realized. strong
leadership can grow the collective bond as well as afford increased op-
portunity for athletes to learn from one another.
additionally, coaches can benefit from fostering group communication
among team members. if good communication is established, individual
athletes will become comfortable sharing feedback, thereby increasing
68

--- Page 83 Text ---
Developing a Successful Team
learning opportunities. it does a team no good for members to have
positive ideas or encouraging remarks that are inhibited or muffled by
poor communication.
Because a team is made up of many individuals, it can be a real
challenge to see that all members are pulling their weight. in a group
environment, certain individuals assume they do not have to contrib-
ute because others will. essentially these individuals feel little or no
responsibility to the team. coaches must ensure that all team members
are accountable for their actions and feel compelled to contribute to the
team. through strong leadership on the part of the coach and through
the development of a strong team bond, accountability can be instilled
in every member of the team.
although there are some standard ways to develop a strong team, a
coach must understand that every team is different. From year to year,
as members depart and new individuals are added, even the chemistry
within a particular team changes. Despite these differences and changes,
the benefits of a positive team environment remain the same. team struc-
ture can benefit athletes at all levels, from the Olympic trials qualifier to
the up-and-coming age-grouper. in addition to being fun, when they are
positive and productive, team environments can improve the individual
performance of every athlete.
Summary
• coaches and athletes work together to optimize individual perfor-
mance.
• By training and competing within a positive team environment,
individual athletes are able to perform at a higher level than if they
trained alone.
• three key characteristics of a positive team dynamic are the col-
lective bond, mutual learning opportunities, and competitive chal-
lenge.
• the shared experience of training together creates a strong team
bond.
• champions in the pool often experience success out of the pool.
• in the team environment, individuals are exposed to and are able
to learn from the success of others.
• athletes must learn not only how to perform but how to win.
• competition within a team environment instills winning habits,
both physical and psychological.
69

--- Page 84 Text ---
Kenney
• the responsibility for establishing positive team dynamics and
chemistry falls largely on the coach.
• the coach must not only exhibit leadership but also identify lead-
ership potential in others and place those individuals in positions
where they can lead.
• individual athletes must become comfortable sharing feedback and
other types of communication.
• the coach must ensure that all team members are accountable for
their actions.
70

--- Page 85 Text ---
c h a p t e r s e v e n
Maximizing a
Swimmer’s Talent
Development
Bill sweetenham

--- Page 86 Text ---
Sweetenham
I have coached and taught thousands of athletes over a 25-year period,
yet I have never coached an untalented athlete. What is talent? talent is
a combination of physical and mental skills, some of which are trainable
and some not. each athlete is a special person possessing various levels
of talent and potential in different areas. It is when the athlete has high
skill levels in the untrainable skills and perhaps less talent in the train-
able skills that quality coaching can make the biggest difference.
It has been my responsibility to recognize the unique talent within
the individuals I’ve coached and to obtain the best possible swimming
result from each of them at the appropriate meet or competition. the
key to maximizing and sustaining talent over the long run is to plan the
correct mix of training loads prior to physical maturation and to plan
for continued improvement after physical maturation through technique
development and proper training. this is not an easy task; there are
recommended guidelines, but every swimmer is unique. the coach’s
ability to obtain the best result from each athlete, regardless of talent,
determines the quality of the coach. therefore, coaches should judge
themselves on what is achieved by their least talented rather than their
most talented swimmer.
to develop the full potential and talent of each swimmer (and thus
the whole team) the coach must start with a two-to five-year plan and
a swimmer development model that suits the ambition, desire, and ca-
pability of the swimmer, the coach, and the program. the club program
must have a financial plan that also coincides with these goals. Over
a period of time, the coach best develops the talent of his or her ath-
letes by finding ways to expose each athlete to a wide variety of skills
beyond their pool and dryland training, such as self-management and
coping strategies, and nutritional education (including cooking lessons
for the athlete and nutritional lectures for the parents). In this way, the
athletes develop physical and mental tools that are transportable from
one program to the next, from their home teams to district, provincial,
and national teams. athlete and coaches must produce the best results
at the right meets under conditions they can neither predict nor control.
this means they must be able to handle the unexpected effectively; they
must be able to maintain their focus on the job at hand despite distrac-
tions, keep their emotions in balance, and conserve their energy for a
perfect performance.
Creating the Environment
coaching is convincing the willing and the unwilling to accept the
72

--- Page 87 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
wanted and the unwanted in order to achieve the “unattainable” and the
unknown. coaching is knowing no boundaries and disregarding what
can’t be or hasn’t been achieved. perhaps the coach’s greatest challenge is
selling these philosophies to swimmers, parents, and club officials, thus
converting involvement into commitment—100 percent commitment.
the commitment of the parent to be a swim parent, of the swimmer
to compete, of the coach to coach, and of the club to support the swim-
mers must combine to best serve and develop dedicated athletes. Most
competitive clubs are an amalgamation of different levels of participation
and mass mediocrity where no one swimmer aspires to be beyond aver-
age. there is no such thing as part-time commitment; social competition
may provide entertainment for the participants, but it is of no value to
competitors. Quality coaching begins with creating an atmosphere and
environment where parents, swimmers, and officials unite with great
pride and enthusiasm to recognize individual excellence and team suc-
cess (see figure 7.1). the creation of a challenging but supportive club
environment will greatly assist in developing and maximizing the po-
tential of all swimmers in the program. If such an environment does not
exist, then many opportunities and much talent will be lost or wasted.
Figure 7.1 Maximizing a swimmer’s talent means converting involvement and par-
ticipation into commitment and competition.
73

--- OCR from Page 87 Image 1 ---
High

Speed

Low

Irevolvennerit, Commitment,
participations » Conpetition

Low High

Fess

--- Page 88 Text ---
Sweetenham
to create the proper environment for developing and maximizing tal-
ent, the coach must possess a strong work ethic, a good quality control
system, flexibility, consistency, and honesty. the athletes must take
responsibility for their performances, be coachable, accept criticism
and praise, be team players, have positive attitudes and be mentally
and physically prepared for every workout and competition. the envi-
ronment must allow the athlete to be physically challenged, mentally
relaxed, and totally focused on the present.
Once a success-friendly environment is established within the club
and the coaching program, it is wise for the coach to privately interview
each swimmer and parent at the start of every training or competitive
season or at the start of every year. rather than telling the swimmers and
parents what you as the coach expect of them, start by asking the swim-
mers what they are willing to do to achieve their maximum potential and
what they expect of themselves. next, ask what the swimmers expect
of you as coach, and then confirm with the parents that they are willing
to support this commitment in terms of attendance and punctuality at
meets, training sessions, and so forth. parents must provide uncondi-
tional love for their child but conditional support for their athlete; that
is, the athlete must show commitment in order for parents to support
his or her involvement in the sport. after talking with each swimmer
and his or her parents you can decide whether the athlete will fit into
your program and whether you can coach the athlete to his or her full
potential.
Focus on Maximizing Each Individual
as a coach, you will eventually look back on your career and ask truth-
fully, “how many senior swimmers did I coach to their absolute maxi-
mum potential and did they enjoy a lifetime swimming experience?”
Your answer will reveal whether you have been a great coach or just a
good trainer. You will train many, but you may really coach only a few.
Formula One racing cars do not come off an assembly line; they require
much individual attention and refining. this same principle applies to
coaches and athletes.
coaches must frequently question if they would do the same workout
if they were coaching only their most talented, fittest athlete or their
weakest, least efficient athlete. By doing so, coaches can offset a middle
pitch philosophy that so often persists in designing and implementing
team swim workouts. a coach should feel that he or she can adapt a
workout—main set, swim down, or kick set—to an individual athlete’s
attitude, dedication, or physical attributes. such adaptations help the bet-
74

--- Page 89 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
ter or more focused athletes to see the positive effects of their application
and help the less dedicated athletes to understand the negative effects
of their application. the challenge for the coach is to have everybody
in the program rise to the higher standard.
Workouts should be competition based, just as competitions should
be a continuation of the training process. athletes should be encouraged
to race someone faster than themselves. Of course this can be difficult to
achieve since most squads contain significantly different personalities,
attitudes, and percentages of male and female athletes. It is important,
though, that all workouts encourage an open attitude toward challenge
and that they finish, whenever possible, on a positive note.
along these lines, it is not wise for the coach to train or work out with
his or her athletes. Besides setting an unreasonable mark for athletes to
attempt to reach, doing so makes it impossible for the coach to supervise
practice. It compromises the swimmers’ workouts and undermines com-
petitiveness, and it breaches the professional standing and relationship
between coach and athletes.
Seek to Improve Your Coaching
Of the approximately 450 practice sessions per year that the coach must
ask of each swimmer, how many achieve their particular objective? how
many, or what percentage of, missed objectives or missed practices do
you consider excusable? assess whether it is the coaching, the athlete,
the stimulus, or the environment that requires changing to improve this
statistic for the individual and the team.
the coach’s level of experience in maximizing individual talent should
always be beyond that required by his or her athletes. Do not rely solely
on self-evaluation of your coaching. ask another coach, from out of town
or even from another sport if necessary, to do a factual, critical, “don’t
spare the feelings” coaching assessment.
Provide Balance
Most of your swimmers will be combining an academic career with the
demands of high-performance competitive swimming. this can require
detailed planning by the coach, parents, and swimmers. coaches should
try to program recovery or adaptation weeks to coincide with return-
to-school dates and exam weeks. Weekly practice sessions might vary
throughout the year to accommodate school; this could mean training
twice a day on weekends and once a day on weekdays for selected weeks.
appointing a team manager who is a schoolteacher is helpful if extended
75

--- Page 90 Text ---
Sweetenham
Standard Coaching Strategies
You have your own coaching philosophy, but the following guidelines should fit some-
where into them, even if you make personal modifications to them. Everything you
do and say at practice and meets will be dinner-table conversation in each of your
swimmer’s homes.
Dress appropriately and act professionally. On the pool deck, there should be no using
mobile phones, no eating or drinking, and no sitting down.
Speak and demonstrate skills clearly and confidently. The swimmers are seeking and ap-
preciate leadership.
Keep your approach simple and consistent. Don’t complicate things; simplicity facilitates
success.
Demand attention (both looking and listening) and do not proceed without it.
Praise endeavors and show confidence in the ability of your swimmers to achieve the
standards you set. Communicate to the swimmers that it is not what they do that matters,
it is how they do it and how often they do it well.
Review skills from the previous session. Allocate 10 to 20 percent of practice time to this
purpose. Do not put skill extension ahead of skill acquisition.
Continually and consistently reinforce expectations—equipment, punctuality, lane etiquette.
Do not compromise standards.
Plan lane organization to allow for an efficient use of space (e.g., down backstroke, return
freestyle). Vary lane leadership.
Be prepared to answer the question, “Why are we doing this?” Relate activities and drills
to the outcomes you are seeking to achieve.
Always outline for the swimmers in advance what’s in it (the session, the drill) for them.
Use incentives and rewards (e.g., cards, certificates, praise for each swimmer, novelties such
as candy), but be sure to expect the best they can offer—no less, no more, no excuses.
Positive, corrective feedback (from coach to swimmer to coach) should prevail. Swimmers
should walk away from each session confident that they have enhanced their knowledge
and skills.
Be in control at all times; allowing swimmers to make decisions is just another way of
your being in control. Keep the session moving with a minimum of talk; demonstrate
and explain only as needed. Have swimmers use many and varied skills to achieve any
predetermined objective.
Don’t be distracted.
Have a theme or mantra for each session such as “100 percent right is 100 percent right;
percent right is 100 percent wrong” or “Good is not good enough where better is pos-
sible.”
Use care and common sense, but don’t be afraid to challenge your swimmers. Young
people love to acquire new skills and to have those skills recognized. They enjoy being
able to do things others cannot do.
Do something positive and personal for every swimmer at every session, whether it’s
offering praise, stroke correction, a comment or joke, or having them demonstrate to the
group, lead the lane, or correctly answer a question.
Watch the strokes and skills over every athlete at every workout.
There are many other strategies and guidelines you may want to add to this list
76

--- OCR from Page 90 Image 1 ---
Standard Coaching Strategies

--- Page 91 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
camp periods away from school are required; he or she can advise the
team as to what is required or acceptable when swimming and school
conflict and can also be of assistance in an educational capacity.
Keep it Serious but Fun
a coach should establish a minimum requirement with regard to team
members’ training standard, competition standard, skill standard, and
attendance at practice and competition. no compromises to these stan-
dards should be considered.
One good way to help younger swimmers grow and develop is to
create a buddy system for athletes that pairs younger, less experienced
swimmers with older, more experienced swimmers. this may make
progressing from one group to the next significantly more challenging
but also more rewarding. the training of the junior squads should in-
clude all four strokes and individual medley training, with the 12- to
13-year-old 200-meter individual medley race being a focal point of
talent development.
Include relay swimming and skills in the squad progression and make
it an expectation within the more senior groups. Make relay a priority of
the training for members of the squad who are nearing the specific ages
at which swimmers’ performance and interest tend to wane. vigorously
promoting the team concept to an athlete and his or her parents just prior
to the swimmer’s last year of secondary school enhances the swimmer’s
enjoyment of the sport and helps prevent plateauing or losing interest
in swimming and dropping out.
One objective of the coach in maximizing individual talent is to keep
that talent motivated and improving within the program, at least until
the swimmer reaches his or her early 20s. this means that the program
must offer something new, different, fun, more challenging, and more
rewarding every year. It therefore becomes very important for the program
to offer social development directed toward the needs of the senior ath-
letes. age-group swimming is a means to an end, not an end in itself.
Develop Solid Stroke Technique
the stroke technique that enables an age-group swimmer to be success-
ful may not be the technique that will carry a senior athlete to his or
her full potential because of the changes in muscle bulk, flexibility, and
mental focus that occur as a swimmer matures. It is therefore extremely
important that the stroke technique that is developed at a young age
be able to carry the athlete to postmaturation success. Quite often, the
77

--- Page 92 Text ---
Sweetenham
most limiting factor in maximizing individual talent is a swimmer’s
not developing his or her stroke technique correctly at a young age. a
compromised technique does not allow the swimmer to improve as the
body matures and develops. the young athlete also benefits from a high
frequency of exposure to training; that is, it is much better to do shorter
practice sessions more often (9 to 10 shorter practice sessions per week)
than longer practice sessions less often.
albert einstein described frustration as “endlessly repeating the same
process hoping for a different result.” Unfortunately, we witness this
process far too often with individuals in the training and competition
arenas of our sport. competitive swimming is a technique-based sport
and the biomechanics of the sport and the strokes can be complicated
and confusing. to simplify this, I ask athletes to remember and apply
four simple rules of biomechanics to all aspects of their strokes:
1. all movements in swimming, from recovery through underwater
pulling, have a slow-into-fast action.
2. If the head is elevated, the hips are down (causing maximum resis-
tance), and if the head is down, the hips are up (causing minimum
resistance).
3. You cannot learn or improve anything you cannot “feel.” this
includes the “feel” for water. athletes should close their eyes
and feel the water as as they complete each step in the following
sequence.
• Body position
• Kick
• sculling
• specific sculling
• timing and breathing
• Full (perfect) slow-motion technique
• Distance per stroke
• turns
• (choice) weak or strong drill segment
4. If you put the hips in position before the arms, any application of
limb force will result in forward movement.
Identifying and Improving Swimmers’ Tal-
ents
78

--- Page 93 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
One might compare the talented athlete to a high-performance bicycle.
the bicycle may have the best wheels available and may be capable of
traveling 100 kilometers per hour, but if the pedals break down at 50
kilometers per hour and the seat is inadequate, the 100-kilometer-per-
hour wheels are of little value. Just as the bicycle is only as valuable as its
weakest link, so is the swimmer. therefore, it is the coach’s responsibility
to build the athlete as a total package. elimination of weaknesses in every
area, both physical and mental, in lifestyle and in training facilitates the
final outcome of maximizing swimmers’ talent development.
prior to the beginning a training program, the athlete should have a
physical or physiotherapy check-up for possible injury risks, muscle
balance issues, and overall alignment. It is also wise for the athlete to
have a full medical and blood profile at the start of each training year, at
the onset of any significant increase in volume or intensity of workload,
and if possible, just prior to or just after major competitions.
In identifying talent, I find it best to confirm your coach’s “eye” for
talent with a sport science evaluation of a particular athlete to accurately
and independently measure the strengths and weaknesses of the indi-
vidual. any individual athletic qualities that can be both measured and
controlled (i.e., that are trainable or changeable) should be monitored.
such qualities include range of movement, endurance, seed, distance per
stroke, distance per kick, and turning time. athletes will win or succeed
due to their strengths but will fall short of their potential because of their
weaknesses. to develop the maximum potential within, athletes must
work on improving their strengths and lessening their weaknesses. here
are some things to look for when identifying a swimmer’s talents:
• strong “aquatic feel” (good stroke efficiency, smooth glide through
the water, bouyancy)
• Long-limbed body with big hands and feet, long and lanky body,
narrow hips, wide shoulders, and hand speed
• rhythm, a relaxed quality in basic swimming skills, and recovery
ability
• an ability to learn new skills to perfection quickly
• a known athletic history in a variety of sports (including parent profile)
• Good body coordination
• parental support and commitment
• Good swimmer attitude
• access to quality coaching
I see talent through the same eyes as Istvan Bayli, renowned author
79

--- Page 94 Text ---
Sweetenham
and exercise physiologist to the canadian ski team. Important aspects
include speed development, stroke efficiency, overall conditioning, tech-
nical skills, tactical skills and experience, and psychological strengths.
every training session must be executed according to the coach’s ex-
pectations in terms of the predetermined training speed, stroke length,
and heart rate. the workout must be evaluated based on the individual
athlete’s ability to achieve the workout’s objectives. the coach must
ask “Did the swimmer at every workout improve in the areas of speed,
stroke efficiency, overall fitness, technical skills, tactical skills, or psy-
chological skills?”
Speed Development
speed is the ability of the athlete to swim fast or to perform an event at
a controlled or specific speed. the ability to swim fast is often deemed
less trainable than other aspects of training because it depends in part
on an athlete’s genetic muscle fiber make up (fast twitch to slow twitch
fiber ratios). however, the ability to control and to sustain specific speeds
can be influenced greatly by training and should therefore be practiced
all year round at an early age. speed training should not be practiced to
fatigue, though; this defeats of the purpose of training efficiency at speed.
speed training is most effective when done in short sets over distances
of no more than 30 to 40 meters, with full recovery. athletes should not
work on speed if they are in a severely fatigued state.
One good way to help develop speed is to use the following formula:
start with the swimmer’s best 100-meter time minus 5 seconds. Divide
this number by 4 to get 25-meter split goal times. (If the swimmer is a
200-meter specialist, take his or her best 200-meter time and subtract
10 seconds.) Using these goal times, record how many strokes it takes
the swimmer to reach the distance at the goal speed. the idea is for the
swimmer to swim at maximum speed with minimum effort. a talented
athlete can travel at about 100 percent speed with 90 percent effort. train-
ing speed to fatigue rather than speed for speed occurs when the athlete
is traveling at 90 percent speed but 100 percent effort, and usually at a
compromised stroke length and stroke rate. thus, an important part of
developing speed is recording the athlet’s stroke length and rate accurately
throughout his or her career. such record-keeping can enable a swimmer
to reap a long-range result from an immediate training stimulus.
Stroke Efficiency
I believe that both efficiency and quality of technique are teachable,
trainable, and coachable. From the time a swimmer first learns to swim,
80

--- Page 95 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
certainly within the first three years of the athlete’s career, he or she
should be taught and drilled in his or her most efficient stroke. this
efficiency is measured in optimal distance per stroke or distance per
kick. Drilling this efficiency should first be done with minimal-effort
sets to have the swimmer focus on technique rather than speed. Quality
technique is vital to success; there are no successful world-class athletes
with poor technique or poor efficiency.
While optimal strength and power development are also important,
they are no substitute for proper technique. Yet I regularly witness
swimmers who try to muscle their way through a stroke with strength
and power instead of rather than as well as great efficiency. Dryland
strength and power training is like medicine: it should only be included
in an athlete’s program when and if required to aid in efficiency. Unless
athletes can swim efficiently, they will not be able to sustain speed and
power. For athletes to be efficient, they must have adequate shoulder,
hip- and lower-body flexibility and mobility. Flexibility and mobility
are developed and maintained through a balanced dryland program that
includes periodical or sustained exposure to training in core strength,
general fitness, specific strength, and power conversion from land to
water. Females will usually require dryland training more frequently
and starting at an earlier age than males.
Overall Conditioning
a swimmer’s overall fitness and conditioning enables him or her to
sustain and to maintain speed and efficiency at certain levels over set
distances. Fitness is the most trainable and changeable talent attribute
of an athlete. however, its value depends on the athlete’s ability to ef-
ficiently swim specific and variable speeds on demand. that is, fitness
can only be maximized if speed and efficiency values have been ad-
dressed. Overall conditioning is the most overemphasized dimension
of developing and maximizing talent because it is very trainable. But
for the vast majority of athletes, it is emphasized at the expense of ef-
ficiency and speed training.
adhering to this simple progression will ensure that athletes do not
sacrifice technique, efficiency, or speed for the sake of overall condi-
tioning.
• Quality control (swim a distance with perfect technique)
• Quality control with goals (number of strokes)
• Quality control with speed (time)
• Quality control with goals and speed
• Quality control with goals, speed, consistency, and frequency
81

--- Page 96 Text ---
Sweetenham
Determining and controlling appropriate training intensity is neces-
sary for maximizing sport performance. applying the basic principles of
sport physiology and integrating an intelligent, balanced mix of training
intensities as well as a variety of training activities are essential elements
of successful coaching.
swimmers should be given a wide range of training experiences and
should learn to control their training intensity; this is the basic principle
of individuality. the biggest challenge is individualizing training inten-
sity when working with a team. a training program must have a sound,
long-term swimmer development model that clearly outlines volume of
training, content of swimming workouts, and content of dryland work-
outs. this training plan should be easily understood and appreciated
by club members, parents, and swimmers.
to improve overall fitness, the swimmer and coach have several choic-
es to consider. Keeping in mind the importance of sustaining efficiency
as training load increases, coaches and swimmers can improve overall
fitness in a number of ways. they may decide to have the swimmer
• do more repeats at same speed and efficiency;
• do the same number of repeats faster but maintain and sustain ef-
ficiency;
• do fewer repeats with the same rest and recovery but faster and with
maintained efficiency;
• do the same number of repeats at the same speed but at improved
efficiency; or
• do fewer repeats with more rest and recovery but faster, at race
speed, while maintaining improved efficiency.
Keep in mind that it is wisest to improve one aspect of swim perfor-
mance at a time, followed by another. to attempt to improve speed, ef-
ficiency, and fitness all at once makes it very difficult to create systematic
adaptation and to evaluate training effects.
the coach conducting a regular training set should follow a progres-
sive system similar to the following:
• exposure 1—have the swimmer complete repeats at either a percent-
age of his or her maximum heart rate or at a beats below maximum
(BBM) value. record swimmer’s times and heart rates as he or she
maintains even split swimming and even split stroke counts and
predetermined efficiency.
• exposure 2—have the swimmer hold the average speed of the set
from exposure 1 while maintaining efficiency and even split stroke
82

--- Page 97 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
count and speed. record his or her improved (hopefully) heart
rate.
• exposure 3—Using the average repeat times from exposure 1 and
the heart rate and lactate values from exposure 2, ask the swimmer
to improve either one or both, or to improve his or her efficiency
while maintaining both and continuing even split swimming and
even split stroke counts.
• exposure 4—Using the information from the first three exposures,
develop a set to either challenge the weaknesses or the race-specific
strengths of the athlete. the swimmer should maintain or improve
efficiency.
each of the four exposures can then be repeated at improved values
in order to match the intensity to the swimmer’s improving fitness.
training or competing at uncontrolled speeds and efficiency produces a
chance or potluck result based on doing enough of every type of training
at varying levels of fatigue. Doing so will have a detrimental effect on
the long-term development of the athlete, jeopardizing the opportunity
to maximize individual potential. all training repeats should be done
at a predetermined speed, heart rate and lactate value, and efficiency
using quality technical skills. control the controllable, measure the
measurable, and prioritize the training so that the controllable and the
measurable exist.
should a breakdown occur in a workout, as evidenced by cardiac
creep, or the athlete becoming distracted, tired, or sick, or the athlete
being generally unprepared due to a miscalculation of the coach, the
coach and senior athlete can take action to adjust the workout in one of
the following ways:
• stop the set.
• Do nothing and hope for the best.
• Increase rest but hold heart rate and speed.
• hold heart rate and ignore speed.
• hold speed and ignore heart rate.
• Break repeats in half and hold both values.
again, the most important guideline is to do what allows the athlete to
maintain stroke efficiency. the adjustment you select will vary accord-
ing to the time within the training cycle, the event being trained for, the
physical and mental state of the athlete, and the all-important recovery
ability of the athlete. the decision for a particular athlete at a particular
83

--- Page 98 Text ---
Sweetenham
point in time is cumulative and can determine the performance outcome.
Only a thorough knowledge of the athlete and of the event will enable
the coach and the senior athlete to make the correct decision.
For the age-group swimmer, it is best to keep weekly volume (total
workload) as constant as possible. For senior swimmers, however, you’ll
want to vary the volume to assist in adaptation. a good rule of thumb is
that for age-group swimmers, 80 percent of the volume of training should
·
be at 70 percent vO2max (or maximum heart rate), which is approximately
individual checking speed. For senior athletes, this may change slightly,
with 70 percent of the total volume being at this speed or slower.
Develop exercises for lower-back and abdominal strength mainte-
nance or improvement if required. I recommend gradually increasing
the dryland program from age-group to senior levels. swimmers should
practice flexibility on a daily basis.
On occasion the coach should conduct one-on-one workouts with espe-
cially deserving athletes, have separate workouts for males and females,
offer skill workouts for those with 100 percent attendance, and provide
special recognition workouts for those above a certain point score.
Technical Skills
the technical aspects of the athletes’ development and capabilities are
related to their turning, starting, and finishing skills. Obviously, athletes
must legally execute these skills at all training sessions so that they can
perform them with the highest degree of skill, efficiency, and speed
in competition. Ideally, the coach should position him- or herself on
the pool deck in order to evaluate these skills and provide immediate
feedback to the swimmers. When giving feedback, the coach must also
seek feedback from the athletes as to how the corrected skill feels. this
exchange helps athletes become more committed to perfection and to
the philosophy that good is not enough when perfect is possible.
I find it beneficial to perfect five to six ways of teaching or redirecting
each skill. as a rule, I do not persevere in trying to teach an athlete any
one way more than six times. the athlete who executes the skill correctly
on the first or second attempt will quickly lose interest and proficiency if
forced to continually carry out repetitious drill. conversely, the athlete
who fails to properly execute the drill in the first three or four attempts
tends to lose interest. having several ways to achieve a quality end result
and practicing each way no more than six times ensures success for all
swimmers. this is called a 6  6 learning progression. similarly, the
mutual feedback between coach and athlete is a 12  12 progression.
Within one hour of instruction, the coach should deliver 12 minutes of
84

--- Page 99 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
individual (as opposed to group) instruction to athletes and receive back
12 minutes of individual feedback.
Your training group must be the best relay changeover team and the
best starting, turning, and finishing team in the competition. the skills
involved relate to hand touch to foot touch or foot release, starting reac-
tion times, and streamlining speed. a high standard in executing these
skills can be taught and demanded at a very young age. It is of great value
to have a referee attend one practice per week and to have him or her
make a list of all observed faults. athletes can then follow up by doing
a workout with a skills coach (from another swim group) to correct the
faults listed by the referee. a double coaching structure, in which each
coach alternately coaches each squad, greatly assists in following up on
skill corrections.
swimming is a technique-driven sport. regardless of the training inten-
sity, the overriding principle of swimming performance is to maximize
propulsive force and to minimize resistive force. remember that high
training intensity is not an excuse to compromise correct technique.
Tactical Skills
the tactical skills of swimmers are directly related to their pacing skills
and their ability to swim in competition and training at their own speed
rather than a speed dictated to them by their competitors. there are some
standard rules such as that it is not good practice to back-end or negative
heat swims, as the perceived exertion at the end of the race is not rela-
tive to the time on the scoreboard. however, the specific pacing of the
race often makes the difference in the final result, and all combinations
should be experienced and practiced in training.
Psychological Trainng
an athlete must be conditioned to perform under all conditions—even
under the most stressful of race conditions. a strong mental attitude can
be trained and stimulated so that the athlete becomes capable of achieving
the required end result with a large amount of coaching influence for an
age-grouper and with a minimum coaching influence for a senior athlete.
One tool that I use to prepare athletes mentally as well as physically is
to have them participate in three meets that are below their personal
standard so that they are expected to win. In this situation, I have the
athlete experiment with different tactical skills. then I have them swim
in two meets that are right at their standard so that they are expected to
win and to perform best times in a situation that is challenging. Finally,
I enter swimmers in one meet above their standard. In this case, they are
85

--- Page 100 Text ---
Sweetenham
placed in what is considered an “unwinnable” situation but are expected
to perform best times. this is called a 3-2-1 competition strategy.
another good tool for developing a rough and ready attitude is a cold
swim in which athletes are expected, with a minimum of warm-up time
and little in the way of competitive atmosphere, to perform a swim within
3 percent of their best time, under stressful situations.
Training for Progress
athletes and coaches must be hungry for winning and for the rewards that
go with it. athlete burnout is usually the result of a lack of stimulus, an
overexposure to competition pressure, or an underexposure to success.
sometimes, it stems from a combination of these conditions.
In age-group competitive swimming, it is quantity that forms the tech-
nical and aerobic background to facilitate improvement after maturation.
the technical skills of the athlete are ingrained through high-volume
(yardage), low-intensity, but high-quality technique work at a young age.
the training progression and early stage preparation of the athlete can
be explained in four simple steps:
1. have swimmers hold quality technique over an extended period
of time at low intensity with maximum distance per stroke.
2. Use repeats of race distances and longer. swimmers should train at
moderate intensities with distractions but hold quality technique
and distance per stroke.
3. repeats that are shorter than race distance should be swum at faster
than race pace with varying rest intervals, but swimmers should
hold quality technique and distance per stroke.
4. repeats that are to be done at race pace and stroke rates should
focus on improved technique and maintain distance per stroke.
When coaches request a maximum-effort swim, they usually mean a
maximum-speed, minimum-effort swim. swimming fast with minimal
effort should be the objective of every competition and workout practice
to assist in facilitating a strong back-end of a race or training repeat, such
that speed is maintained without any loss of stroke length. to produce
maximum potential in a swimmer of any race distance, this skill cannot
be compromised in training in any way. stroke efficiency is always the
predecessor of speed. applying the reverse strategy rarely if ever works,
yet so many try. even split repeat training swims must be evenly split in
both speed and stroke length, with even split stroke length swims being
86

--- Page 101 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
developed before speed is introduced into the equation.
It is said that with low-intensity, high-concentration training, athletes
will become bored before they get tired and that therefore coaches must
be innovative and creative. however, as with any other type of training,
coaches must have athletes rise to their level of expectation rather than
simply accepting whatever the athletes are willing to give. It is not so
much the work the athletes do that matters, but the degree of efficiency
and the effort put forth. Quite often, the coach and the environment are
responsible for the results. varying workouts to keep them fresh can
be as simple as ensuring that every warm-up be different and that it be
supportive of but in contrast to the main workout.
speed efficiency training (distance per stroke) must be incorporated
into early age-group low-intensity, high-volume quality technique train-
ing on a year-round basis. Ideally, a 12-year-old swimmer can complete a
200 individual medley using 16 strokes butterfly, 24 strokes backstroke,
16 strokes breaststroke, and 24 strokes freestyle so that speed or over-
speed training can occur at the start and/or finish of workouts, or can in
fact be the main set. the young swimmer might sprint 8 strokes butterfly
or breaststroke and try to achieve a maximum and measured distance,
or might sprint 20 to 25 meters (50 for the trained or more advanced
athlete) in the least number of strokes.
the overspeed component contributes to the quality-control objective
of the practice segment. this type of swimming should be practiced
between 80 and 100 repetitions each week for mature swimmers. While
it can be practiced with varying rest periods, it should not be practiced
to fatigue; the purpose is to develop speed faster than race pace at race
stroke length. an athlete is capable of giving 100 percent effort at any
time but may only achieve full speed if physically and mentally fresh.
however, it is good for the coach to demand full speed from a physically
fresh but mentally stressed athlete. Once this speed training is achieved,
it can then be incorporated into a separate training goal of developing
lactate production, then lactate tolerance and perhaps peak training.
throughout the increase in intensity, during practice and competition,
stroke length and speed maintenance should not be compromised.
as age-group swimmers develop into open or international competi-
tors, their training will change significantly. they will advance from a
training program that includes only three training speeds to perhaps five
or six training speeds. Later the reverse occurs. age-group swimmers find
that as the body matures, more recovery work is required and specific
training is needed so that the multifocus workout or practice session
now becomes a dual- or single-focus workout. the recovery ability of
87

--- Page 102 Text ---
Sweetenham
the athlete changes, and a seasonal recovery or adaptation period may be
needed to support or replace the individual weekly recovery. the older
or more practiced the swimmer, the quicker the response or adaptation
will be to any given training stimulus.
For developing talent, I base the training speeds on percentages of race
performance and speed, progressing to a beats below maximum (BBM)
heart rate value after male swimmers are physically mature and during
maturation for most females. I introduce lactate values for advanced
athletes after they have learned, used, and mastered the speed and heart
rate training. the end result is that we monitor, record, and evaluate
all these values, along with perceived exertion, during advanced and
periodical step tests, quality training, and competitions (see figures 7.2,
a through g).
We record these on clear plastic graph paper or graph paper sealed
in plastic so that each value or graph can be overlaid for comparisons
of any value, any test, any workout, or speed. each swimmer then has
a portfolio of these values available at all times for comparison with
other tests and performances. checks are made frequently at workouts
on all speed-related values. the swimmers are also aware of their own
individual maximum heart rate in the water (not from a formula such
as 220 less age), individual checking speed, recovery index, and stroke
and speed efficiency indices. For at least 80 to 90 percent of the total
training volume, training repeats must be executed at a predetermined,
even split (speed) stroke length and stroke rate relevant to heart rate
and lactate control.
Within training, the importance of test sets must be kept in perspec-
tive. test sets provide the swimmer, personal coach, and national coach
with a view of the swimmer’s current state of fitness in specific areas
by providing technical evaluations such as stroke length, stroke rate,
streamlining speed, and turning and finishing speeds as compared to
heart rate, lactate levels, and perceived exertion values. With this infor-
mation, it is possible to estimate reasonably accurate percentages of the
energy system being used. values such as individual checking speed,
speed and stroke efficiency, and recovery indices can be used as guides
to the overall and specific physical fitness of the athlete.
It has been my experience that the emphasis applied to a given training
distance is often changed significantly either by extending the distance at
the same intensity or by varying the recovery of the athlete. an athlete’s
ability to recover is of vital importance in determining exactly how he
or she might train. Quite often, the recovery ability of an athlete over-
rides his or her slow- or fast-twitch muscle fiber make-up as a primary
88

--- Page 103 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
Figure 7.2a Monitor, record, and evaluate data during testing, training, and competi-
tion.
89

--- OCR from Page 103 Image 1 ---
Cunem recults

qat ered ave.
Sin aon 10m 100m 100% HF La =F Sc =El RFE
1 2SEE fhe SS one 144 io Baad a 4 7
Fs 2404 T4000 Bd 120 | | oe 128 1
3 2374 T7130 7HE | OTRE 125 21 9 ae od. Le? 12
4 234d TT. TS OTRE 155 27 AT aE ee TE
= 2ERT Tad40 O7ES OTA iz 52 She os ne
5 2248 T1000 7S TRE 120 14100 SRE os We TRE
7 2208 Baz To? Too 12 3 she oe at
Derieed results
Sin T Tine La HF oor ra oa
1 ao oan 141 oe ou 185
z a n=) 140 ed. H Lee
Ec tz 1.57 120 at cco Lee
4 Te 10 164 ou ae Lee
F 74 B13 itz od. at Lee
5 7 11 184 od. a 128
7 BE ahd ie dz 4 Lee
Summary of demeed resukts
La (rik  (retsy Tire HF: =F ac SEL derobis nerobe
1 125 HH id? a cco 126 100 16
ze 125 a0 1241 oe cc 1.85 Ser it
Fc 126 7 158 a oe 1.84 Sebi Ge
cc 1.27 74 154 at ccm 1.85 Ec Tt
4 1.28 Te 155 at 34 1.82 Sere ot
= 12 7 15 ae ccm 1.82 Sore 1
= 1.85 74 162 a 3 1.82 ere earre
1 1.8 Tz ima oH a5 1.85 TR aor
max 145 to) 120 a4 FE 182 cy ott
26S 1.20 The 164 oH ae 1.85 Soe 1
LTFe an 4.7 SEI variabon Ore

Summer of anaes bie threshold results
Babe Lay (ri!) yp (rs) Time, HFyy 9 Fey 920 Sy, SEI Halong) an «© LTR:

11 Oc 3a afd 1.31 TE 163 ar EC 11% =o 1h 31
a= Ot oo Ber Le TRE 16 eet 71 11% a Tet a1
S Poy SS 330 1.35 Td.3 162 24 Ec a on Ea 12h 46
11 Jan Go 371 1.5 Te 165 216 5 1% =n ie 42
T Peto S25 1.33 Tho 167 S17 me Ore ST Ta 47
0p Cad 365 1.20 Te. 164 314 Ec Ore aaa TE 47

--- Page 104 Text ---
Sweetenham
Figure 7.2, b-g Keep a portfolio on each swimmer for comparison and planning
purposes.
90

--- OCR from Page 104 Image 1 ---
Hear trate (bpm)
ii
o

120

2 oS Te Fd PO 6
Time per 100en (econ)

50.0

0

a0.0

2.0

20.0

Shroke ravte [art oh mite)

20.00
8 o2 Fe Fd TO 6
Time per 100nn feconds)

2.60
2.50
2.00)
2.30)
2.20
2.10

2.00

O—_- i
1.20

1.70
Ds 2 7 Fd TO Gs
Tire peer 100 feecored 2

trots efficdency index (So)

Ss Mo —#— 11-.bn-00

Lauctarte: (rab)

Stroke count (stroke SOn)

RPErmtng

—O— 7 Feb-00

12.0
10.0
2.0
6.0
40
2.0

0.0
2 ft re rd To 66

Tine per 1O0en fecondsi

3d

fa

a
Fa]

2d
oh fe fe rd To 66

Tine per 100en fecond=)

12
16

14
12
10

oo

6
Ds 2 Tf fd TO OEE
Tiree per 100m fecord =

oe 30-Apr-00

--- Page 105 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
concern in making training decisions.
the following are test sets that I recommend for the development of
talent at the age-group and youth level:
1. Individual medley stroke-count efficiency
2. Individual checking speed tests in which the pace for the set is
based on the swimmer’s personal best 100-meter time + 15 seconds
(+ 20 for breaststroke)
3. Maximum heart rate tests
4. age-group and youth sprint test pacing sets
5. 7  200 age-group and youth test set
For further information on these test sets, refer to Bill sweetenham’s
Test Sets for Age and Youth Level Swimmers as published in 1999 by
the australian swimming coaches and teachers association.
While there are many more tests sets, these should enable the coach
and the athlete to recognize when the athlete is ready to perform or train
at optimal levels. these sets also allow the coach to evaluate the training
program and the progress being made by an athlete over any given period
of time. an example of an individual medley test set is as follows:
4  250 on 4:00 minutes. hold 50s at a predetermined submaximal
value for speed and efficiency based either on a personal best time plus
10 seconds or individual checking speed values. Where the 100-meter
distance is indicated in the following table, the athlete performs this
distance and the stroke indicated at goal time for the 400 IM. these
values may be halved, along with the distance, for the 200 IM.
Butterfly Backstroke Breaststroke Freestyle
100 50 50 50
50 100 50 50
50 50 100 50
50 50 50 100
add up the 100 times for a goal-pace 400 individual medley.
I find it beneficial to hold two, perhaps three, events back once a
swimmer becomes physically mature so that those events can be used
to kick start a training or competition plateau, should either occur at
this difficult age.
I recommend that backstroke aerobic work and quality breaststroke
pull work be included in every swimmer’s aerobic, base-training program
91

--- Page 106 Text ---
Sweetenham
at maturation age. By completing a significant portion of their aerobic
base training using backstroke, an athlete will develop a free but deep
rhythmical breathing technique and a balanced stroke (due to a straight
arm recovery). Most important, the athlete will learn the value of applied
trunk rotation prior to early application of limb and hand pressure, and
force, against the water. this low-intensity, backstroke aerobic work,
coupled with limited-stroke, high-quality, resistant breaststroke pull
work over short distances, enhances the specific early application of
limb and hand force and assists in developing specific power.
the athlete progresses from a training-to-train phase to a training-
to-compete phase to a training-to-win phase, and any attempt to short-
circuit this process by the coach, swimmer, or parent usually ends in
disaster. however, an experienced, artful coach can determine how
long each athlete should remain in each phase. the temptation today is
to undertrain and overrace swimmers, as opposed to overtraining and
underracing them as was done in the not-too-distant past. together, the
coach, athlete, parents, and administrator must use common sense and
find the correct balance for each individual.
Scheduling Competitions
Because competition can overstress athletes to the point that they com-
promise or ignore their distance per stroke and distance per kick, I believe
a program must contain a competition black-out period in which they
focus on training and preparation only. the black-out period should exist
for up to approximately two months per year. During this time, it is ideal
to allocate each swimmer 12,000 points (international point score) and
have them work to reduce their points to zero. Identify who can do so,
how quickly they can do so, and who can do so with the least number
of self-nominated, predetermined, stand-up swims or cold starts. this
point reduction contest helps swimmers adjust to the pressure of com-
petition by having them practice producing the best result in less than
perfect conditions while under a manageable amount of stress.
this competition black-out period should be followed by a competi-
tive period in which athletes move, while maintaining control, from the
longer events to shorter, more specific individual race distances as the
major meet draws closer. Keep athletes stimulated by offering a variety
of competitions: team competitions, single-event, multi-event, front-
end/back-end competitions (working only on specific simulated splits),
relay competitions, and so forth. But also be selective in competitions.
very few racehorse trainers would take their entire stable to every rac-
92

--- Page 107 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
ing event, yet often swim coaches will take their entire squad to most
scheduled competitions. Instead, swim individuals as needed to fit the
requirements of the team as well as the individuals on the team.
a model for competitions is that athletes will improve at about 3 per-
cent per year of birth and that they will compete at the same number of
competitions as their age within 3 percent of the average of their best
time and their goal time. along with this, athletes should be capable of
competing heats within 3 percent of their goal time, semi-finals within 2
percent of their goal time, and finals within 1 percent of their goal time.
they should be able to meet these same percentages but of best times at
mock trials or in simulated racing at the workout arena.
Profile of the Talent-Maximized Swimmer
the talent-maximized member of a quality program
• has an annual or a two-year plan incorporating academic work,
family life, training, and competitions—and distributes copies to
all of the relevant and associated people;
• has 100 percent attendance at practice sessions;
• does not arrive late or leave early from competitions or training;
• does not need to be instructed or reminded more than once;
• incorporates both a team and an individual approach to their
sport;
• loves to race;
• loves the sport and is committed to it;
• has an open mind and believes that anything and everything is pos-
sible;
• has great self-esteem and confidence developed by exposure to and
success in defeating challenges and obstacles—and, in fact, enjoys
the higher and more difficult challenge;
• always does more than the coach asks;
• has learned and practiced the ability of self-promotion but un-
derstands that confidence, not arrogance, is a key factor in perfor-
mance;
• can handle the press and media in both positive and negative situ-
ations with equal ability;
• is very honest in self-assessment of training and competition;
• is competent in turning both ways (right to left and vice versa) in
training and competition;
93

--- Page 108 Text ---
Sweetenham
• practices difficult breathing patterns;
• practices circling lanes both right to left and left to right;
• practices pulling first on alternating arms in backstroke and freestyle
repeats;
• can repeat exact stroke counts and specific predetermined times
with even split, efficient strokes.
• uses two self-prepared (not prepared by parents or coach) drink
bottles in each workout;
• carries at all times two suits, two caps, two pair of goggles, and so
forth;
• advises the coach of any illness or injury before training or competi-
tion;
• is capable of fruitfully using his or her free time to enhance training
or competition performance;
• consistently offers the coach feedback on technique, training repeats,
best times or sets, heart rates, and so forth;
• practices good self-management in all areas, understanding that
focusing on solutions is always better than focusing on problems;
and
• practices quality nutritional habits at all times, especially during
competition and travel.
While there are many more, these are some of the basic requirements
and principles that coaches and clubs must address in developing self-
management and coping strategies for athletes. It is not wise to think
that the above attributes will be developed without the aid of a team
approach within a club or program. the old adage that you must make
it happen in the preparation in order to have it happen in the competi-
tion, rather than the reverse, applies.
Summary
• the enthusiasm of the coach, the club, and the parents must be
directly proportional to that of the swimmer.
• challenge must be provided at the highest level. Magnificent perfor-
mance must take precedence over mediocrity, and the basic skills
must be taught to perfection and done exceptionally well.
• coaches must have great empathy for the athletes they lead but must
demand great commitment in return.
94

--- Page 109 Text ---
Maximizing a Swimmer’s Talent Development
• coaches must maintain a clearly defined yearly plan, a training log
book, and a current attendance chart in a central coaching office
where they can be signed by the athletes on a weekly basis and
reviewed by the parents every month.
• the challenges of attaining the maximum performance at the right
time for each athlete will reward all involved in the program with
an enormous sense of achievement and well-being.
• there is no greater satisfaction or feeling than to play a role in an
athlete’s success in obtaining the highest possible result, knowing
that nothing was left to chance and no compromise was consid-
ered.
• Great swimmers always do more than the coach asks, and great
coaches always contribute more than the swimmer expects.
95

--- Page 111 Text ---
Part
III
Creating
Effective
Practice
Sessions

--- Page 113 Text ---
c h a p t e r e i g h t
Long- and Short-
Range Planning
Jill Sterkel

--- Page 114 Text ---
Sterkel
Long-range and seasonal planning and preparation are essential for
success in swimming. Without a well-constructed plan and a vision for
your program, it is easy to get lost and frustrated. i consider a training
plan to be a program’s map to success. properly devising a training plan
with attention to detail before the season begins can prevent a coach
from losing sight of the goals of the team. i look at the seasonal plan as
the foundation for the year ahead.
Long-Range Planning
there are several factors that must be taken into account when develop-
ing a long-range plan. the first and most critical question to ask yourself
is where do you want your long-range planning to take you? in other
words, what is your program’s ultimate destination or goal? While each
individual in your program will be at different levels of a performance
or ability pyramid, the goal of program has to be structured around the
peak of that pyramid. Second, start to think about what needs to be ac-
complished in order to get there. to help answer these questions and
to illustrate some of the more frequent issues regarding planning, i will
relate some of my experiences as a head coach at the University of texas
at austin.
there are several factors that influence my basic framework in creating
the long-range plan at Ut. these include, but certainly are not limited
to, the following:
• Where the athletes are now in terms of their fitness, skill level, and
experience
• Where the athletes want to go
• how much time there is for athletes to reach their goals
always the most basic component in analyzing the long-term plan
is time. how much time do the athletes have to reach their ultimate
destination? ideally as a high school or collegiate coach you are devel-
oping a quadrennial (or four-year) plan and can begin by highlighting
key competitions over the four-year period. Decide which competitions
swimmers will need to swim in order to reach their goals and map out
when these occur within each season. Make a list of these necessary
competitions and keep this list handy for your reference as you break
down the training. it is necessary to break down the quadrennial plan into
smaller pieces, thereby creating yearly or seasonal plans. even though
it is tempting to focus on the smaller seasonal plans, always remember
to focus on the long-range objective. Do not compromise the ultimate
destination for the sake of smaller seasonal victories. But don’t assume
100

--- Page 115 Text ---
Long- and Short-Range Planning
your long-range framework is etched in stone, either. i find it useful to
evaluate each long-term plan at least yearly and to make updates and
modifications where circumstances demand, yet i remain loyal to my
basic philosophy and goals. For example, for one of our incoming fresh-
man in 2000, we set the main seasonal goal of getting to the Olympic
trials. as the swimmer progressed faster than we had anticipated back in
October, by april we had to shift the goal to making the Olympic team.
Our basic plan for the swimmer didn’t change, but we did update her
goal’s focus based on her progression.
i can’t emphasize enough the importance of the planning process. it
helps you organize your ideas, create a clear direction, and refine your
coaching philosophy. Not having a plan is a lot like going to a foreign
city and on arrival, trying to find your hotel without a map. No doubt
you have been in a situation where you were lost without a map and
spent an enormous amount of time and energy trying to get going in the
right direction. Sometimes when you are lost you even ask complete
strangers for advice on how to get somewhere without knowing if they
are even familiar with the area or with your destination. Ultimately,
you find you have spent a great deal of time making wrong turns and
retracing your steps. having a solid plan, or map, can help direct you
to your final destination without making those unnecessary mistakes
along the way.
a long-range plan also creates a record of where you have been and
where you are trying to go. at the very least, a written plan provides a
record of what you did so that later you can evaluate and make a de-
termination of what worked well and what should be improved on in
future seasons.
how much detail should you include in a plan? that is up to you.
i view planning as a personal thing. there are some people who have
to write down every minute detail and others who don’t, yet everyone
needs to plan. choose the style that works for you. But if you are putting
any type of plan together for the first time, it’s a good idea to write it
all down. as you progress and get more comfortable with the planning
aspect of swimming, you can incorporate your own particular style and
include or omit whatever information suits you.
Once you have picked the major events that will lead to the long-range
goal, it’s time to look more closely at your seasonal plan.
Seasonal Planning
as with long-term planning there are a few issues you need to consider
before you can begin to shape your strategy and begin preparation. again,
101

--- Page 116 Text ---
TabLe 8.1 Sterkel
Master Calendar
Month Dates Mon. Tues. Wed. Thurs. Fri. Sat. Sun. Week # Phase
aug. 21-27 Frosh Off Off 0 Off
report season
School 28-3 Team Off 1 Pre-
starts mtg. pm pm pm season
Sept. 4-10 pm pm pm pm pm pm Off 2 Preseason
11-17 pm pm pm pm pm pm Off 3 aerobic
18-24 pm pm pm pm pm pm Off 4 aerobic
25-1 pm pm pm pm pm pm Off 5 aerobic
Oct. 2-8 am am am am Off 6
pm pm pm pm pm aerobic
9-15 am am am am Off 7
pm pm pm pm pm aerobic
16-22 am am Team am Intra am Off 8
pm pm mtg. pm squad aerobic
23-29 am am Team mtg. am Relay am Off 9
pm pm pm pm meet anaerobic
30-5 Dual Dual Off 10
meet meet anaerobic
Nov. 6-12 am am am am am Off 11
pm pm pm pm anaerobic
13-19 am am am Off 12
pm pm pm pm pm Race
20-26 am am am 13
pm pm <———- Thanksgiving ————> pm Race
27-3 am am Invite Invite Invite 14
pm pm pm pm Competition
Dec. 4-10 Off am am am am Off 15
pm pm pm pm aerobic
11-17 Dead Dead Finals Finals Finals Finals Off 16
day day aerobic
18-24 Finals Finals am <—- athletes go home—> 17 aerobic
25-31 <—— athletes home ———> am am 18
pm pm pm anaerobic
Jan. 1-7 am am am am am Off 19
pm pm pm pm pm anaerobic
8-14 am am am am Dual Dual Off 20
pm pm travel meet meet anaerobic
School 15-21 am am am am am Off 21
resumes pm pm pm pm pm anaerobic
22-28 am am am am am Off 22
pm pm pm pm anaerobic
29-4 am am Dual Dual Off 23
pm pm pm pm meet meet Race
Feb. 5-11 am am am Dual Dual Off 24
pm pm pm meet meet Race
12-18 big big big Off 25
12 12 12 Competition
19-25 Off 26 Race
26-4 Off 27 Race
Mar. 5-11 Off 28 Race
12-18 NCaa NCaa NCaa Off 29 Competition
19-25 Off 30 Competition
26-1 US US US US US US 31
Ntls. Ntls. Ntls. Ntls. Ntls. Ntls. Competition
102

--- Page 117 Text ---
Long- and Short-Range Planning
you need to begin by looking at time. how many weeks do you have in
your season? how much pool time is available to you on a daily and
weekly basis? how much time can you devote to weight training and
dryland training throughout the season?
the first thing i do is start with an empty yearly calendar and fill in
the blanks. While i take into account the major goals or milestones over
the four years that athletes will be in our program, i focus specifically
on planning the one season. i write down all the dates that i believe will
be important in the planning process. these include the date student-
athletes will report to campus, the date training beings, invitational
and dual meet dates, travel and vacation periods, final-exam dates, and
the date of the designated taper and shave meet for the season. this is
all laid out in a weekly format (see table 8.1). in addition to the above
information, the layout should indicate how many weeks remain in the
season, as well as how many weeks of training have been completed.
table 8.1 illustrates the layout of our upcoming season at Ut, begin-
ning with the first week of September and culminating with the Ncaa
championships and the US World championship trials in the spring.
TabLe 8.2a
Seasonal Planning
Preseason Aerobic Anaerobic Race specific Com-
petition
Primary eN1 eN1/eN2 eN3 (distance) eN3/SP1 eN3/SP1
(50%) eN3/SP1(sprint) (distance)
(distance) SP1/SP2
(sprint) SP1/SP2(sprint)
Secondary eN2 eN3 eN1/eN2 eN1/eN2 SP2 (distance)
(35%) (distance) (distance) SP3 (sprint)
SP2/SP3 (sprint) SP3 (sprint)
Maintenance SP3 SP1/SP3 SP1/SP3(distance) SP3 (distance) eN1/eN2
(15%) eN1/eN3 (sprint) eN1/eN2 (sprint)
# of weeks 1-5 3-8 2-6 (distance) 1-4 1-4 (distance)
2-5 (sprint) 1-5 (sprint)
# of weeks if 3 1 2 1 1
8-week season
# of weeks if 5 3 5 2 1
16-week season
# of weeks if a season longer than 24 weeks requires cycling through phases more than
24- to 30-week once to prevent overtraining.
season
103

--- Page 118 Text ---
TabLe 8.2b Sterkel
Seasonal Planning
Month Dates Week Development Primary Secondary Maintenance
Compe- # of phase focus 50%
focus 35% 15% tition weeks
aug. 21-27 0 Off season x x x x 32
28-3 1 Preseason eN1 eN2 SP3 x 31
Sept. 4-10 2 Preseason eN1 eN2 SP3 x 30
11-17 3 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 x 29
18-24 4 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 x 28
25-1 5 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 x 27
Oct. 2-8 6 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 x 26
9-15 7 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 x 25
16-22 8 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 Intrasquad 24
23-29 9 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 Relay meet 23
30-5 10 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 Dual meet 22
Nov. 6-12 11 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 x 21
13-19 12 Race specific eN1/SP1/SP2 SP3 eN2 Dual meet 20
20-26 13 Race specific eN1/SP1/SP2 SP3 eN2 x 19
27-3 14 Competition eN1/SP1/SP2 SP3 eN2 Invite 18
Dec. 4-10 15 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 x 17
11-17 16 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 Finals 16
18-24 17 aerobic eN1/eN2 eN3 SP3 Home 15
25-31 18 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 Home 14
Jan. 1-7 19 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 x 13
8-14 20 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 Dual meet 12
15-21 21 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 x 11
22-28 22 anaerobic eN3/SP1 SP2/SP3 eN1/eN2 Dual meet 10
29-4 23 Race specific SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 Dual meet 9
Feb. 5-11 24 Race specific SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 x 8
12-18 25 Competition SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 big 12 7
19-25 26 Race specific SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 x 6
26-4 27 Race specific SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 x 5
Mar. 5-11 28 Race specific SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 x 4
12-18 29 Competition SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 NCaa 3
19-25 30 Competition SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 x 2
26-1 31 Competition SP1/SP2 SP3 eN1/eN2 US Natls. 1
104

--- Page 119 Text ---
TabLe 8.3 Long- and Short-Range Planning
US Swimming’s Types of Training
Type of Pace Heart race Distance Middle- Sprint
training (bpm) group distance group
(yards) group (yds) (yards)
eN1 2 to 4 seconds 120 to 150 5,000 4,000 3,000
slower per 100
than threshold pace
eN2 anaerobic threshold 160 to 170 4,000 3,200 2,400
or maximum effort
over distance
eN3 1 to 2 seconds 180 to 190 2,000 1,600 1,200
faster per 100
than threshold pace
SP1 as fast as possible 190 to 200 600 600 600
SP2 as fast as possible 190 to 200 400 400 400
SP3 Maximum speed 160 to 170 100 to 150 100 to 150 100 to 150
TabLe 8.4a
Distance—Weekly Framework
Morning Afternoon
Monday eN1/eN2/SP3 Weights
pulling and kicking eN2-eN3 (2,000 to 3,000)
eN1 (3,000) set of 200s to 1,000s
Tuesday Urge Weights
eN1 kicking, pulling, eN1/eN2 (long, mix in kicking)
and drills Weak stroke work
Wednesday Off Team meeting
eN2-eN3 (300  100 at 1:20 [mile pace]);
(2  150 at 2:15 [mile pace]);
(10  250 at 4:00 [descend to 500 pace]);
(3,000 or 3  1,000 [60 second drills])
Thursday Urge Weights
eN1 kicking, pulling, eN1/eN2 (long, mix in kicking)
and drills Distance IM
Friday eN1/eN2/SP3 pulling Weights
and kicking eN1/SP3
Challenge set day: 3  500
at 5:30 (descending); 3  400 IM at 5:00 (descending)
Saturday Urge; empty your tank! Off
eN1-eN3 + SP1-SP3
(could be anything)
105

--- Page 120 Text ---
Sterkel
Dividing the Season Into Phases
i divide each season into five separate training phases: preseason, aerobic
development, anaerobic development, race-specific, and competition.
the first two phases (preseason and aerobic development) focus on
building general endurance so i have grouped them together for discus-
sion here.
We also break up the season a bit by having a short, race-specific phase
in December to prepare our athletes for an invitational meet we hold
at that time each year. Our athletes don’t taper and shave for this meet,
but we do ease up on the training intensity a bit (while keeping volume
steady) to help the swimmers feel rested for this meet, rather than dog
tired. i find that breaking up the season in this way gives the athletes a
little break from aerobic development and a chance to race fast, while
keeping them in shape as they head into winter break.
TabLe 8.4b
Sprint—Weekly Framework
Morning Afternoon
Monday Weights Medicine ball work; stretching
eN1 eN3 (1,000-1,500—75s to 125s)
SP3 (20 minutes of eN1/SP3 (starts and turns)
power sprints)
Tuesday Urge Weights
eN1 kicking, pulling, eN2 threshold swim set (20  100 hold
and drills specific time)
Wednesday Off Team meeting
SP2 (200 to 600 per set; 1 to 3 sets (25s, 50s,
75s) eN1
Thursday Weights Medicine ball work; stretching
eN1 eN2 (2,400-3,200 mix of swim and pull
SP3 (20 minutes of SP2 kick 8  35 at 3:00
power sprints
Friday Urge Weights
eN1 kicking, pulling, eN1 drill and swim
and drills eN2 pulling
SP3 starts and turns and short blasts
Saturday Medicine ball work; Off
stretching
empty your tank!
eN1-eN3 + SP1-SP3
(could be anything)
106

--- Page 121 Text ---
Long- and Short-Range Planning
again, this seasonal plan is created in relation to looking ahead to the
swimmers’ long-term plans.
the next step is to break the season down into phases. in the past,
i have used the guides provided by US Swimming to tailor my season
to the various physiological phases (see table 8.2, a and b and table
8.3). in a collegiate season there are generally 30 weeks to work with.
While 30 weeks may seem rather lengthy and is the outside limit of US
Swimming’s guidelines, it serves the school year well and allows for
the winter holidays. table 8.4, a and b highlights the proposed break-
down of a week for Ut’s distance and sprint swimmers. generally more
distance-oriented swimmers will swim a higher percentage of their
training (in volume and frequency) in the endurance (eN1, eN2, and
eN3) phases than sprinters will. Likewise, sprinters will spend a higher
percentage of their time in the water doing speed work (Sp1, Sp2, Sp3)
than distance swimmers will. Our program is generally the same each
year as far as the breakdown of the preseason, aerobic, anaerobic, race-
specific, and competition phases, but we constantly make adjustments
to fine-tune our training plan.
after carefully creating a plan it is time to share it and sell it to your
team. i truly believe that a plan will fall flat on its face without the support
and ownership of the team. having monthly team meetings in which you
give training calendars to the athletes is a good way to keep athletes up-
dated on what to expect in their upcoming training and racing. We meet
as a team to discuss team goals and we set up individual swimmer-coach
meetings two or three times a year to discuss each swimmer’s personal
goals and how the swimmer is progressing toward them. involving your
athletes in the process empowers your team. everyone works harder if
they feel that they have had some input during the course of the year
as to the team goals and the process by which the team is attempting to
achieve them. i also recommend that coaches take the time to sit down
with athletes individually and to establish an individual plan that allows
them to address their own personal strengths and weaknesses.
the funny thing about a plan is that there will always be minor, and
possibly major, bumps in the road that you have no control over. You
may have to tweak your plan in order to accomplish what you set out to
do. Beware of being so entrenched in your focus that you are afraid to
make changes when a particular athlete fails to respond to the training or
becomes injured. You have to be flexible. Maintaining focus is important
but not worth the expense of losing an athlete. realize that your plan
may not work for everyone. Being able to recognize this and to adjust
your plan for each individual will make you a better coach.
107

--- Page 122 Text ---
Sterkel
include short sets of speed work. an excellent way to include speed is
to focus on starts, turns, and relay exchanges as well as short sprints
(25 yards or less). to ensure the application of all energy systems it is
recommended that, especially during this phase, all training sessions
be written down.
Race-Specific
this is the two- to four-week fine-tuning phase prior to the final compe-
tition phase. Speed work reaches its peak during this cycle, accounting
for about 85 percent of work. it is important that the swims in the speed
training of this cycle directly correlate to the athlete’s overall goal time
through race-pace swimming. Swimming at race pace should be precise
and on target. all components of the athlete’s race must begin to come
together; fine-tuning race strategy and race skills are essential tasks dur-
ing this time. continue to include an aerobic endurance component (15
percent) during this phase to ensure that the athlete maintains a solid
endurance base.
Competition Phase
this phase is generally referred to as taper. taper means preparing to
swim fast. it is crucial that you not allow your athletes to get lazy or
sloppy during this final phase, but for the most part, all the hard training
is over. You have either done the necessary work to accomplish your
desired goals in training or you have missed the opportunity.
From here on out the focus should be rest—rest from decreased train-
ing intensity and physical rest away from the pool. continue fine-tuning
and race-pace preparation with this in mind. the length of this phase
will vary depending on the individual swimmer and the time you have.
generally, the competition phase lasts about three weeks.
after the collegiate season and a short break in april all of our swim-
mers are expected to resume training either by swimming for their home
club program in the summer or by staying in austin to train.
Summary
• planning is your map to success.
• Your long-range plan must have a final destination and must provide
guidance as to what needs to be done to get there.
• Your plan must take into account the time period involved.
• always remember to focus on the long-range objective during sea-
sonal training.
108

--- Page 123 Text ---
Long- and Short-Range Planning
General Endurance
the eight weeks of general endurance are divided into the preseason
phase (weeks one through four) and the aerobic development phase
(weeks five through eight). the idea behind general endurance is to use
endurance (eN) and speed (Sp) work to bring the athletes back into good
cardiovascular and muscular shape. the preseason phase includes train-
ing that is 50 percent recovery or eN1, 35 percent eN2, and 15 percent
Sp3. the aerobic development phase includes training that is 50 percent
eN1/eN2, 35 percent eN3, and 15 percent Sp3.
generally my athletes are returning to school after their summer
seasons and have had approximately two weeks off. the goal of the
preseason and aerobic development phase is to begin the process of be-
coming as physically fit as possible. at Ut, we start with an emphasis
on dryland and weight training. the bulk of our three-hour time slot in
the afternoon is devoted to dryland and weightlifting activities. athletes
also begin swimming during this phase. Most of the swim time is spent
on drills and general aerobic conditioning in the form of freestyle and
individual-medley training. the stress levels start off fairly low and
increase in length and intensity as swimmers progress through these
sessions, which include double workouts beginning in early October.
teaching proper technique in all areas of training is essential. Now is
the time to practice in order to make perfect. generally speaking, if bad
technique is not addressed in this phase, you can expect it to continue
throughout the season. Value and demand proper technique, always.
While this phase primarily calls for the development of the aerobic
system, you should not neglect speed work completely; do about 15
percent of training volume speed work. Speed work over very short
distances should be used to maintain and to build speed throughout
the season.
Anaerobic Development
the anaerobic development phase is very challenging and lasts for
three to five weeks. the training in this phase is divided into 50 percent
eN3/Sp1, 35 percent Sp2/Sp3, 15 percent eN/eN2. the athlete will be
expected to perform at race-pace speeds throughout this phase. Weekly
planning for this type of training is crucial. generally speaking, 24 to
48 hours are needed before lactate tolerance or overload endurance sets
are repeated. this provides adequate time for muscle glycogen recovery.
Basic endurance training should also be included in this phase and is
a good choice for recovery days. Once again you must remember to
(continued)
109

--- Page 124 Text ---
Sterkel
• allow for adjustments to be made to your plan as needed.
• to plan each season, start with an empty calendar and fill in com-
petitions and goals that work toward the major seasonal goal.
• Break each season into physiological training phases.
• communicate your plan to the team and involve team members in
110

--- Page 125 Text ---
c h a p t e r n i n e
Putting Science
Into Practice
Bruce r. Mason

--- Page 126 Text ---
Mason
We live in an age in which we can see the effects of science and technol-
ogy influencing just about every aspect of our lives. in most cases ad-
vances in technology have helped to reduce our workload and to improve
the quality of our lives. Swim coaching is no different. coaches who do
not take full advantage of the benefits of technology and science will fall
behind those in other programs as well as their own swimmers.
Science and technology can make a significant difference in competi-
tive swimming. this chapter provides a brief overview of how sport
science and sports medicine contribute to swim performance. Whether
your program has the luxury of having a team of sport scientists and sport
physicians you can call on, or whether your program relies on you, as
coach, to seek out the necessary specialists for your athletes, this chap-
ter illustrates several ways to elevate performance levels in swimming
through the use of science and scientific models.
Scientists Who Can Help
Sport science and sports medicine are composed of a number of dis-
tinct disciplines. Sport science includes biomechanics, physiology,
and psychology; sports medicine includes physiotherapy, massage, and
sports nutrition. each of these disciplines contributes significantly to
performance in competitive swimming by providing a service to or by
carrying out applied research.
providing a service involves testing or treating swimmers in order to
specifically enhance their performance as individual swimmers. Servic-
ing provides quick feedback to assist the individual swimmers involved
in the testing. research, on the other hand, is the testing or treatment
of a group of swimmers or subjects that is performed to obtain a better
understanding of the larger group of swimmers that the research subjects
represent. it takes some time for information based on research findings
to become available to individual coaches and swimmers. however, the
knowledge gained from research investigations should be applicable to
many swimmers.
Generally, the way in which a sport scientist can make the most impact
in practice is to carry out servicing that affects a large group of swim-
mers. in this way the swimmers and coaches learn to understand and
use the results of the testing. in time the service provided may lead to
questions that can be answered through more applied research.
coaches who travel with national teams may have access to a team of
sport scientists. in this situation the coach is responsible for coordinating
and prioritizing the services provided by these experts to the swimmers
and for implementing their recommendations.
112

--- Page 127 Text ---
Putting Science Into Practice
Biomechanists
Biomechanics, the study of locomotion, has a direct application in evalu-
ating the technique swimmers use to propel themselves forward and to
perform starts and turns. it involves the study of forces and the actions
that occur as a consequence of applying these forces. Biomechanics mea-
sures what the swimmer does and identifies technique inefficiencies that
can be corrected to enhance the swimmer’s performance. coaches can
gain solid, quantifiable information about their swimmers’ performances
through biomechanics. this information can help them to objectively
compare the techniques used by different swimmers and by a particular
swimmer at different periods in time.
Physiologists
physiology studies the effects of physical training on the swimmer by
using such things as lactate measurement and heart rate monitoring
to identify how well the swimmer is physically coping with training.
physiology also allows coaches to evaluate the aerobic and anaerobic
fitness levels of their swimmers. through physiology you can identify
the swim speeds required by a particular swimmer to train the various
physiological systems of the body. Moreover, physiologists are able to
measure skinfolds to indicate changes in a swimmer’s body composition.
physiologists are also well suited to conduct the warm-down swims after
competition; they can objectively measure lactic levels to ensure that
the swimmers have performed the warm-down swims adequately. this
frees the coach to watch other swimmers competing rather than having
to supervise swims in the warm-down pool.
Psychologists
psychology provides a strategy to mentally prepare the swimmer for
training and competition. it provides the means by which a swimmer
can identify and focus on short- and long-term goals and therefore re-
tain interest in the swim program over an extended period. psychology
provides the swimmer with an understanding of how anxiety levels
influence his or her performance, and can offer ways of coping with
stress and high anxiety levels as well as ways of raising anxiety levels
when necessary.
Sport Physicians
Sports medicine primarily involves the diagnosis and treatment of both
illness and injury. in the treatment of ailments, sport physicians must
be aware of medications that may affect the ability of the swimmer to
113

--- Page 128 Text ---
Mason
train effectively or that may contain banned substances. Most injuries in
swimming are overuse injuries, and most illnesses are associated with
respiratory infections.
not only do sport physicians treat injury and illness, they also look
for ways of preventing such problems. prevention may involve educat-
ing coaches and athletes or dispensing preventive drugs to avoid illness
problems. the sport physician’s preventive role is particularly useful to
teams that do a lot of traveling to compete and may come into contact
with known causes of ailments. the sport physician can also provide
protection and treatment related to illnesses that occur with seasonal
changes. injury prevention may involve making suggestions to the coach
about lessening the risk of an overuse injury by altering technique.
Sport physicians also have a role to play in educating coaches and
swimmers about banned substances that could otherwise be taken
deliberately or inadvertently (i.e., in common over-the-counter cold
medications, nutritional supplements, and so forth). they can suggest
safe, alternative medications so that swimmers avoid ingesting a banned
drug.
Physiotherapists and Physical Therapists
probably the most important function of a team physiotherapist is the
prevention, rather than management, of injury. this is best achieved
through musculoskeletal screening to identify swimmers who are at risk
for injury. a physiotherapist may find, for example, that a swimmer’s lack
of flexibility is resulting in poor technique as well as potential injury.
physiotherapists are ideally suited to assess the flexibility levels of swim-
mers, to treat those cases of reduced flexibility, and to prescribe exercises
that increase range of motion. physiotherapists perform an important
function in identifying and working with swimmers to rehabilitate
certain injuries, particularly soft-tissue, joint, and tendon injuries. the
physiotherapist is an ideal person to lead warm-up flexibility exercises
for team training sessions while the team is away on tour; they are gen-
erally not treating swimmers during the warm-up and thus can fill the
need of leading warm-up activities at no extra expense to the team.
Massage Therapists and Nutritionists
Massage therapists are able to provide recuperative massage treatment for
athlete recovery from hard training sessions and competition swims. the
primary role of a team nutritionist is to supervise the menu preparation
for team food. Generally, the nutritionist looks after the supply of extra
food and the preparation of the sport drinks for training and competition
114

--- Page 129 Text ---
Putting Science Into Practice
sessions. the nutritionist has the responsibility of establishing a policy
on nutritional supplementation and of providing advice to swimmers in
matters concerning supplementation. a significant role of the nutrition-
ist is educating swimmers about eating sensibly. nutritionists can also
teach swimmers the practical skills of how to shop for nutritious food
at reasonable prices and how to prepare appetizing, healthful meals.
Adding Science to Your Coaching
in most home-based programs, the coach does not have multidiscipline
support at his or her fingertips. in such cases the coach will need to
perform some of the more fundamental functions of each of the disci-
plines and, when necessary, direct swimmers to support outside the
confines of the home training environment. in order for this to be effec-
tive the coach needs to build bridges between his or her program and
local institutions that provide professional support. to perform some
of the more fundamental tasks and to fully understand and implement
the recommendations that come from outside professional support, the
coach will need to pursue in-service training to keep abreast of changes
in the science associated with swim coaching. So, you may ask, which
of the professional support disciplines is the most important in elevat-
ing swimmer performance? all the disciplines are of vital importance;
the removal of any one of them cannot be compensated for by increased
emphasis on the other disciplines.
Developing a Competition Model
We no longer live in a world where the swimmer wakes in the morning
on the day of a contest, feels fantastic, and simply swims with maximum
effort to win the gold medal. Major events can now only be won if the
swimmer has effectively prepared for the competition. this preparation
involves the development of a competition model, or race plan, that may
be different for each swimmer and for each event in which a particular
swimmer is to compete. the coach and swimmer devise the model as
a consequence of the swimmer’s goals and abilities. the model takes
into account the speed of the start, how each swim phase of the race is
to be swum (stroke lengths, stroke frequencies, and swim speeds), and
the time of each turn phase. to prepare a swimmer to win the event, the
model must have as its desired completion time the anticipated winning
time for the event.
the idea of the competition model is that the swimmer must maintain
the objectives of the model throughout the race. Moreover, the model
provides the swimmer and coach with a means of planning training;
115

--- Page 130 Text ---
Mason
every aspect of training must have some relevance to the competition
model.
So how does one begin to develop a competition model? the compe-
tition model can initially be developed from the information derived
from a competition analysis of the swimmer concerned. refinement of
the competition model would then occur after each competition, with
the expectation of improving various aspects of the race.
Using Competition Analyses
competition analyses are now standard practice in all major swim cham-
pionships. Such analysis is performed by officials or scientists at major
meets and by parents of swimmers or assistant coaches at smaller meets.
the analysis breaks all long- and short-course championship events into
the following phases:
• 25-meter “free-swim” phases that exclude any part of each 25-meter
length that is considered the start, a turn, or the finish
• the start phase, which extends from the starting signal until the
head of the swimmer is 15 meters out from the start wall
• the turn phases, which extend from when the head of the swimmer
is 7.5 meters out from the turn wall on the way in to 7.5 meters out
from the turn wall on the way out
• the finish phase, which extends from 5 meters out from the finish
wall until hand touch
in the analysis, time and average velocity are measured for each of
the start, turn, and finish phases. For each free-swim phase, the analysis
measures average stroke length, average stroke rate, and average velocity,
and computes the efficiency index. By definition, stroke length is the
distance the head travels from right-hand entry to the next right-hand
entry. Stroke frequency is the average number of strokes that would oc-
cur in a minute. average velocity of the swimmer is the velocity of the
head as it moves down the pool. the efficiency index for a particular
phase is the product of the swimmer’s average stroke length and aver-
age velocity. When all this information is provided for each swimmer
in the race in a spreadsheet format, it is easy to identify why the race
was won and where and why other swimmers lost the race to the win-
ner. it is also an easy matter to identify the weaknesses of any particular
swimmer in the race.
Before competition analyses were regularly performed, coaches had
only lap split times to help them identify weaknesses in technique, en-
durance, and other aspects that slowed propulsive speed. Such times
116

--- Page 131 Text ---
Putting Science Into Practice
were of limited value in identifying weaknesses in particular phases of
the race. Besides being far more helpful in studying weaknesses, the
results of competition analyses are useful in refining individual com-
petition models and in identifying general changes in race strategy that
occur as a result of rules changes.
if the competition analysis identifies a weakness in a particular phase
of an event, that phase should be examined more closely in a training
environment by the coach in conjunction with a biomechanist if pos-
sible. For example, if a competition analysis reveals that a sprinter has a
weakness in her start, the start phase needs to be broken into subphases
and each subphase must be examined for inefficiencies. a start (from
the block to 15 meters from the block), for example, may be divided
into the following subphases: on block, flight, underwater, and above
water. Biomechanical examination of the start phase may identify that
the swimmer is weak in a particular subphase. Such a biomechanical
evaluation would incorporate distance and timing information as well
as above- and below-water videotape of the performance. Weaknesses
are most easily identified if a swimmer’s timing and distance data are
compared with that of other swimmers of equal ability and with that of
elite swimmers.
Similarly, the turn can be divided into the following subphases: above
water into the wall, rotation, push-off, underwater out from the wall,
and above water out from the wall. a biomechanical examination of a
free-swim phase would consist of both above- and below-water videotape
as well as information concerning stroke length and stroke frequency.
intrastroke velocity and acceleration profiles of the free swimming—mea-
sured in a biomechanics lab or training center—would also be of interest
in examining the swimmer’s technique.
When making any biomechanical assessment, a videotape showing
what the swimmer is actually doing, as well as objective performance data
for the swim, should be considered. During such testing, it’s important
that the particular phase under examination be performed at competition
pace. if the particular phase under examination is a turn, for example,
the testing should incorporate a free-swim section on either side of the
turn to simulate competition conditions as closely as possible; in com-
petition a turn is not completed in isolation of free swimming and the
swimmer is often not fresh at the time of performing the turn.
all possible causes of an inefficiency or weakness, such as problems
with technique, strength, flexibility, or motivation, should be considered
when identifying a solution to the problem. probably the most expedient
way of eradicating a weakness is to follow testing with evaluation, fol-
117

--- Page 132 Text ---
Mason
lowed by coach intervention, followed by swimmer practice, followed
by retesting. repeating this cycle as needed is most effective.
Common Problems Found in Starts
Slow reaction time off the blocks
poor takeoff angle
poor body position on entry into the water
poor streamlining in the underwater subphase
too steep an ascent angle in the underwater subphase
ineffective underwater propulsion
not using enough distance under the water
poor transition from the underwater subphase into swimming
Common Problems Found in Turns
inconsistent approach into the wall
poor adjustment—too far or too close—into the wall
Using head bobs to initiate turn
Slow rotational leg speed
reversing rather than changing direction
poor push off
poor streamlining
ineffective underwater propulsion
not using enough distance under the water after the turn
too steep an ascent angle in the underwater subphase
poor transition from the underwater subphase into swimming with
breath
Maximizing Swim Velocity
Maximum swim speed is determined by two forces:
1. the propulsive forces of the swimmer on the water, which moves
the swimmer forward
2. the drag force of the water on the swimmer, which tends to slow
the swimmer
When the swimmer is performing with maximum effort and the pro-
pulsive and drag forces are in equilibrium, maximum swim speed is
118

--- Page 133 Text ---
Putting Science Into Practice
limited by the state of equilibrium. to swim faster, the swimmer must
either increase the propulsive force or reduce the drag force. Drag force
can be reduced by improving streamlining during recovery. this is by
far a better method of increasing swim speed, as it requires much less
energy than increasing the propulsive force. it is only when methods of
reducing drag have been exhausted and stroke technique issues have
been addressed that the coach and swimmer should look to ways of
increasing propulsive force.
Swim velocity is the product of stroke length and stroke frequency.
it is more efficient to have a longer stroke length and a lower stroke fre-
quency than the reverse, for a set swim velocity. however, it is possible
to overextend the length of the stroke. Some coaches believe that stroke
length should be maximized in order to maximize swim velocity. this is
not correct. the stroke length should instead be optimized by experiment-
ing with different stroke numbers and stroke frequency counts. During
swim competition, a swimmer should aim to maintain the same stroke
length through the entire race. the swim velocity toward the end of the
race is increased by increasing stroke frequency while maintaining this
optimal stroke length.
it is paramount for the modern coach to incorporate sport science
and sports medicine into his or her swim program to make that program
effective and competitive. in a national elite program, sport scientists
and sports medicine professionals are often available to assist the coach.
the coach must know what he or she can obtain from these resources
and then must be able to effectively integrate that information into his
or her swim program. the coach should prioritize which services are
needed most and should acquire them in that order.
While the age-group coaches may not have sport scientists to assist
them, they can use the principles of sport science in their programs
by enlisting parents to help. parents can videotape athletes to help the
coach measure and evaluate swim technique. coaches can call on sport
scientists and sports medicine experts from nearby institutions for advice
and consultation. in order to benefit from technological advances, the
coach must remain current in sport science and sports medicine. he or
she must be enterprising and must show initiative in finding ways to
seek out and use scientific information that pertains to swimming.
Summary
• Sport science and sports medicine contribute to the performance
of swimmers by providing a service to or by carrying out applied
119

--- Page 134 Text ---
Mason
research.
• Biomechanics helps identify technique inefficiencies that can be
corrected to enhance swim performance.
• physiology identifies the swim speeds required by a particular
swimmer to train the various physiological systems.
• the competition model is the race plan designed by the swimmer
and the coach; it is based on the results of race analysis.
• if competition analysis identifies that a swimmer has a weakness,
then that phase must be examined more closely in a training envi-
ronment.
• Biomechanical evaluations can be made for stroke, starts, turns, and
finishes.
• Maximum swim speed is determined by two forces—propulsion
and drag.
• Swim velocity is the product of stroke length and stroke frequen-
cy.
• Stroke length should be optimized, not maximized.
120

--- Page 135 Text ---
c h a p t e r t e n
Applying the
Art of Coaching
Deryk Snelling

--- Page 136 Text ---
Snelling
as I began to write this chapter, I thought about the essential ingredients
for success in swimming, as a coach or a swimmer. I concluded that it
comes down to having inner drive, solid role models, and positive experi-
ences. Of course, being blessed with natural talent doesn’t hurt either.
to my mind, there are no shortcuts to success and no substitutes for
hard, tough swim workouts. You must plan to balance training and rac-
ing, and must always be looking to be not only tougher but smarter in
your approach. as a coach, this means staying up to date with both the
science and the art of swimming and coaching. at the same time, it’s
important to never lose sight of the basics: health, speed, endurance,
power, strength, and technique.
One of the first principles of the art of coaching is to discover whether
an athlete has the talent, desire, and ambition to succeed. next determine
if he or she is coachable. are you going to be able to communicate with
each other? Is there a feeling of two-way trust, and do you have the sense
that the athlete believes you can take him or her right to the top? Do
you truly believe that the swimmer can make it to the top? are you both
willing to put in years of work at an intense but focused pace? the road
to the top is not an easy road, and following it calls for far more than a
short-term commitment. It can take from six to eight years to develop a
great champion. even if you are fortunate enough to come across talent as
great as that of Mark Spitz or Ian thorpe, it will take at least a full four-
year cycle, up to and including an Olympic Games, before an athlete is
really accomplished. a little bit of luck on the day of an Olympic event
might come in handy too, when the difference between being good and
great can be as little as .01 seconds!
My coaching mentor was George haines, a multidimensional genius,
who could work equally well with boys, girls, men, and women in any
event, distance, or stroke. he saw only the good in people and was al-
ways able to make someone feel special and to tap into each individual’s
hidden strengths. he could make you believe in the impossible. he
certainly did that for me when I was a rookie coach from england who
had come to the Santa clara Swim club to watch his miracles. I learned
from him to set no limits for myself nor for the swimmers who choose
me as their coach. two ideas in particular that I learned from George
haines are central to my coaching:
1. Be optimistically positive in your role as a coach every day. always
try to catch your swimmers doing something good and compliment
them on it, filling the air with positive feelings. Let them know
how good they are and just how great they are going to be if they
stay on track. I feel that swimmers are sometimes more interested
122

--- Page 137 Text ---
Applying the Art of Coaching
in what you say and do as a coach than in how knowledgeable
you are. Still, you should always be sure of the reasons for your
actions and be ready to explain them if challenged. as a coach,
you must have credibility.
2. We all start out believing we are not only good, but potentially
great; it is a coach’s job to never to lose sight of that belief. See
yourself as a winner, figure out what you have to do to reach your
goal, and continue climbing.
So, you may wonder, how can coaches ensure that their athletes are
given the opportunities to develop the qualities and experiences neces-
sary to make them successful swimmers? I think the secret lies in build-
ing a swimmer’s confidence in training and racing, setting no limits on
achievement, using team training to each swimmer’s advantage, keeping
training fun, using the science and resources available, and providing
competitive experiences.
Build Swimmer Confidence
nort thornton at the University of california at Berkeley, whose success
as a swim coach is legendary, has a knack for instilling in his athletes
the belief that they can achieve. he does this with some famously chal-
lenging workouts. a young swimmer of mine, Graham Smith, in calgary,
alberta, once told me about his toughest workout ever: a 30,000-yard
workout nort had him do at a training camp. I thought a similar challenge
would be a good idea for swimmers at my annual christmas training
camp. I always used the 7- to 10-day camp to encourage swimmers to
“go for it,” making it long and hard, a kind of survival course. I likened
it to “selection,” as it is called in the Special Boat Service (SBS), one
of Britain’s top military units. One hundred and thirty-nine men from
the royal Marine commandos start selection for the SBS; the rigorous
course eliminates them one by one through fatigue until only nine are
left. the idea is that once these nine are identified, this select group can
be developed and trained with the certainty that they will not quit when
the going gets tough, physically and mentally.
to match nort’s tough workout, I decided to have the swimmers try
25,000 meters (equivalent to 30,000 yards). a few dropped out, but
most of them completed the grueling workout, and although they were
tired, they felt great about having done it—so much so that after we had
finished, one of the swimmers who had missed the session altogether
and another who had tried it but quit part way through asked if they
could do it on their own the following day. Listening to the rest of the
123

--- Page 138 Text ---
Snelling
team talking about their great achievement, these two felt that they had
missed out on something very important.
I was thinking that it would be hard for them to do the workout on
their own when someone feeling a bit macho piped in, “Let’s all do it
again.” there and then I said, “OK. But we all do it, and not 25,000 me-
ters, but 30,000 meters in one workout” (even more than nort’s famous
30,000 yards in one day). everyone said OK, and everyone did it the
very next day. that 55,000-meter two-day total is indefensible in sport
science, but it gave those swimmers a belief in themselves that no one
and no situation could ever take away from them. accomplishing those
workouts helped them to realize how tough they can be when they ac-
cept a challenge and adopt a positive mind-set.
I have worked for a long time to build confidence in my swimmers,
and have found that this can be done in many different ways. no two
swimmers are alike. In planning it is very important to get the right mix
of training and racing for each swimmer. I believe that racing is the very
best training that anyone can do for all distances, but particularly for
the 50-, the 100-, and the 200-meter events. the balance of training and
racing will vary more for a middle-distance or distance swimmer. For
the 400 up through the 1,500, a coach has to consider things such as the
amount and frequency of rest the swimmers need, when they should
shave, and how rested they will be for the race. Whether a swimmer
will wear a drag suit or one of the new super suits will again depend on
the overall long-term racing plan being followed at the time. coaching
swimming is an art-driven process supported by science.
along these same lines, being in great shape for training isn’t the same
as being in shape to race. I have been on club swim meet tours where
we have traveled for 30 days, racing as many as 50 times, reshaving
seven or eight times over that period, and have continued to improve
throughout the tour. I have had swimmers who swam in all eight of
the World cup meets, back-to-back, in all different countries, and kept
shaving down for each meet. Sometimes a long period of smooth skin
helps swimmers (especially those who have a lot of hair) to feel the
water better, a sensation that they can lose during the training season.
as their tour of fresh-shaven racing continues, their feel for stroke and
kick rhythm, water pressures, and streamlining all improve. a speed
stroke starts to become natural, flowing, and efficient, quite unlike the
unshaved stroke. I believe that you must try many things to find what
works for each swimmer. It could even be one rest, one taper, and one
shave per year for one type of swimmer and two, three, or even four
shaves for others. It’s all very individual and can change from year to
124

--- Page 139 Text ---
Applying the Art of Coaching
year for each swimmer.
Set No Limits
having belief in oneself also means recognizing that no one owns a
particular event. When the underwater dolphin kick was first adapted
for backstroke, I had a backstroke swimmer who was very good but just
did not have the feel or skill to get maximum speed from his underwa-
ter kicking. he was ranked number four in the world for almost five
years, and in his first Olympics he swam the backstroke leg in the 4 
100 medley relay to help the canadian team win silver. two years later
he was second by .03 to the US swimmer in the individual event at the
World championships. coaches and swimmers have no control over
what other competitors do, and in this instance using the underwater
dolphin kicking technique wouldn’t have helped us, particularly since
there was no restriction on the distance of the underwater kicking at
this point.
however, once the 15-meter rule was introduced, we once again had
a chance. We worked very hard during the pre-Olympic year, concen-
trating on our strengths rather than our weaknesses. capitalizing on
his advantage of fast turns, this swimmer broke the world short-course
record several times and gained valuable self-confidence. the result was
that at the Barcelona Olympics, he won the gold medal by .03 against an
athlete with a superb underwater kick, despite losing a lot of distance
on the start and after the turn. In fact it was a catch-up situation right
up until the last six inches of the race, where it all came down to fitness
and being the last swimmer to slow down.
another of my backstrokers developed a bone problem in one leg and
had to spend six months with her leg in a full-length cast. We were able
to cut off her cast for commonwealth Games trials, where she swam with
a one-legged kick, just trailing the other leg behind. three weeks later
she won a 200 backstroke commonwealth Games gold medal. eventually
her leg did heal, and two years later she won an Olympic bronze medal
from lane eight. I firmly believe that she benefited from the strength and
confidence she gained in overcoming her leg injury.
Train as a Team
I believe in team training. the energy is extremely strong when a group
works together. Within lanes, swimmers can be grouped with peers of
similar strength. each swimmer in the line keeps the other swimmers
125

--- Page 140 Text ---
Snelling
focused and thinking about where they are in the lane order, who is in
front of them, who is behind, and how well they have to perform the
work to survive, to do their part, to not let themselves down. It’s just
amazing how hard and fast a swimmer can train in a lane with other
swimmers without really feeling pain or fatigue. In these close quarters,
a swimmer feels alive and hardly has time to let his or her mind drift.
this type of exercise trains swimmers to keep their minds focused in
race situations.
another good exercise that takes advantage of the benefits of team
training involves having 8 to 10 swimmers in one 50-meter lane do a
set of 8  400 on either a progressive speed interval with tight turnover
or a fast time interval with fast turnover. With each swimmer leaving 5
seconds apart, it takes 40 seconds or so to get the last swimmer off the
wall. therefore the first swimmer is soon chasing the last one off. the
current in the lane becomes so strong that the whole line is able to float
along, with each swimmer using the drag from the one in front to make
his or her own swim easier. I put this kind of workout into the category
of assisted swimming; benefits include great speed and very short in-
tervals can be easily attained. In such workouts everyone feels a great
sense of achievement. Moreover, doing fast times on short intervals is a
great confidence booster.
I personally prefer to coach a large group of 30 or more if they are
compatible in their ability to do similar workouts. however, when it
comes to taper and coaching swimmers with various personal goals and
abilities, unless extra staff members are available to help out, it is better
to work with a smaller group of 12 swimmers or less.
Individual medley training is a great way to coach and train a team.
Individual medley fits in really well if you work with a team that swims
only between 45,000 and 55,000 meters per week during the regular
season. all the time that you spend in the water should be productive,
and the medley helps ensure that that is the case. If a swimmer is train-
ing to specifically race the IM, every kick, pull, drill swim done in IM
training works toward the specific event’s development, so he or she
will do all of the session well instead of possibly drifting through part of
the workout. For a swimmer with an individual event other than the IM
as the main event, doing a variety of strokes will automatically prevent
specific stroke burnout, which tends to occur when all the work is on
one stroke only. thus IM training is a great way to prevent boredom.
Likewise, IM racing can also boost conditioning. racing individual
medley long course and short course over the 200 and 400 (and includ-
ing the 100 for short course) gives swimmers a great range of distances
126

--- Page 141 Text ---
Applying the Art of Coaching
to develop all physical systems—shorter races for anaerobic fitness and
longer races for aerobic fitness. In fact I feel that breaststroke, backstroke,
and butterfly swimmers should also race the 50 and 400 distances in their
stroke, as well as the 100 and 200. periodically, breaststroke, backstroke,
and butterfly specialists should enter the 50 or 400 freestyle events and
race their stroke in these events.
as well as working with individual events, I love to coach relays.
they bring out the best in most swimmers. the common goal of a relay
fosters unity, and the sense of responsibility to three other team members
is often so strong that swimmers achieve some of their best times even
when they are tired.
Keep Training Fun
every workout must be challenging and fun. Boredom will kill the spirit
and fatigue a swimmer more quickly than anything else. challenge your
swimmers. Make the challenge as big as you like; the bigger the challenge,
the more fun it is and the greater the satisfaction in achieving success.
Over the years I have found that cross training is good for swimmers
and that the variety prevents boredom.
For morning training I have always offered more than just water work-
outs. Our weight-training sessions, particularly circuit training, could
last anywhere from 20 minutes to over an hour. I might have swimmers
do as few as eight exercises and as many 60 circuit stations. Occasional
running training also works well. probably the best motivator and the
most fun way to start the day, though, is playing games. Basketball, vol-
leyball, and football have always been popular with my canadian teams,
but the big favorite is floor hockey in a small gym.
For floor hockey games, I like to mix the men and women on the
teams. the game can be highly competitive, and it allows the women
to be as aggressive as they wish, checking and charging, while the men
are not allowed to make aggressive contact with the women or to retali-
ate in any way. the women can give free reign to their aggression, and
the men are encouraged to develop more subtle skills and better self-
control, so everyone benefits. these games are so popular that it is not
unusual for athletes to turn up more than 20 minutes early for a 6:00 am
workout so that they can enjoy warm-ups, practice shooting skills, and
so forth. Some athletes will even ask to come in for a game on their day
off. the team goes into the subsequent swim workout charged, excited,
and really positive, which is especially important as morning workouts
should be just as good as afternoon sessions. In top-class competition,
127

--- Page 142 Text ---
Snelling
many swimmers don’t make finals because they are not conditioned to
go fast in the morning heats.
not only can games provide excellent attendance, happy early morn-
ing starts, teamwork development, and a great warm-up, they can also
give the coach cues as to how to work with each swimmer in the pool.
Games allow the coach to evaluate assertiveness, self-control, attitude,
and quickness. altogether, games are a great way to start the day.
another way that I have kept swimmers stimulated over the years is
by bringing in top foreign swimmers or organizing team visits to go to
see world-class coaches and athletes from other sports. contact with
such individuals helps set the standards for the swimmers and myself.
every sport has individual characteristics, strengths, and weaknesses
that we can study, adapt, and incorporate into our training methods. For
example, Olympic gymnastic coaches know how to develop strength and
flexibility, particularly relative to pound for pound of body weight, and
track coaches are particularly adept at developing speed, endurance,
and explosive power.
I have a good friend who was the leader of a very successful Mount
everest climb; he made a presentation to our team outlining their train-
ing regimes and how they learned to deal with stress and fear. he told
of his personal trauma when some members of the group were killed
on the climb and the team had to decide who would carry on and who
would go back down.
On the other end of the emotional spectrum, practitioners in the art of
transcendental meditation have come in to teach us yoga skills during
our workouts. I believe that you should always be looking out for ideas
to improve your basic skills, keeping training simple and focused, tough
and consistent, and that you should always try to adapt new perspectives
and activities to your training plan if and when appropriate.
Keep Up on the Science
I’ve been interested in the benefits of altitude training ever since I at-
tended the 1968 Olympics in Mexico city. While I believe it works very
well for some swimmers when done correctly, not all swimmers improve
with this type of conditioning. altitude training needs to be integrated
into the one-, two- and four-year training plan. the swimmers must be fit
but not too tired when they go up to altitude, and they should build up
their work slowly over the first four to six days, increasing the volume
and intensity. Over the last four days the quality and quantity decrease,
which means that they have only 10 days or so as a window of opportu-
128

--- Page 143 Text ---
Applying the Art of Coaching
nity in which to train long and with intensity. equally important is the
approximately three-week (depending on the individual) recovery and
race preparation period. In my opinion, it can take from three to five
visits to altitude per year to receive maximum benefit.
normally our team does our altitude training around 7,200 feet. the
best locations I have found so far are Sierra nevada, Spain, and Flagstaff,
arizona. I have worked at some training centers as low as thredbo,
australia (1,300 meters), and Font romeu in France (1,850 meters) and
am currently considering the “live-high, train-low” methodology in use
at a new training center in Queensland, australia, which is operated by
former australian Olympic runner ron clarke. at this center, swimmers
train at sea level, preferably in a 50-meter pool in warm outdoor loca-
tions, and live in nearby altitude houses that simulate the atmospheric
conditions of a prescribed altitude.
Living high and training low is still quite a new concept that has good
potential as an additional training aid. the fact that altitude houses can
be built in any location could eliminate the current need to travel to
mountain training sites so that in the future they may even become part
of normal training environments. Some of the advantages of the live-
high-and-train-low approach over the high-altitude training currently
in use include the following:
• there appear to be none of the acclimatization problems normally
associated with altitude camps.
• there is less risk of overtraining and no interruption of normal
training routines.
• these camps can be more easily, and perhaps more frequently, in-
tegrated into the normal annual plan.
• the accepted norm of 21-day altitude camp training can be extended
to 40 days or longer.
It is ideal to have a physiotherapist, a massage therapist, an exercise
physiologist, a nutritionist, and a medical doctor on site for general sup-
port during altitude training.
Ideally, our top national British swimmers will train at this type of
facility from early november right through late February (during the cold
and wet UK winter months when the danger of colds and flu can spoil
a healthy training schedule). currently, this luxury is, of course, only
possible if you have the financial resources as well as a flexible school
system with the availability of private tuition. however, I believe that
this training method will become more common for more swimmers in
129

--- Page 144 Text ---
Snelling
the future as a greater number of swimmers will have the opportunity
to win larger financial awards for themselves and their countries. the
standard a winner must meet is becoming increasingly high around the
world, and it may be that little extra that swimmers gain from altitude
training that will make the difference.
another important scientific resource coaches should make use of is
a sports medicine and sport science staff. I have always brought these
specialists into my support staff for swimmers when I could. these pro-
fessionals provide important help in realizing the racing result that we
are aiming for in a given season, year, quadrennial, or lifetime.
there is a very basic method of optimally fitting sport science into a
program; the following arrangement works quite well for me. I expect my
sport scientists and sports medicine specialists to keep the swimmers
healthy and injury free while I apply more quantity and quality to the
progressive training and racing loads, and develop and perfect swim-
mers’ techniques for starts, turns, and swimming the race. I work with a
sports physiologist at the core of my planning, and I rely on him or her
to supply the necessary individual requirements to support that plan
through nutrition, flexibility training, strength training, and so forth.
Provide Unique Competitive Experiences
One of the most exciting things you can do to enhance your swimmers’
success is to plan a competition trip for your team. Visiting other people
and programs is one of the best possible ways for you and your team
to expand your horizons and to regain a fresh attitude toward competi-
tion.
I planned such a trip with my club team from Britain and took them
on a nine-day swim meet tour of Germany. I selected a team of 32 swim-
mers and a team manager, and we hired a bus. My intention was that we
would swim in a dual meet against a top team every day in a different
city for six consecutive days of the nine-day trip and that we would be
billeted with six different families. Besides cutting down on expense,
this arrangement exposed us to a completely different set of challenges
and contrasting environments. We had agreed to swim any program
chosen by the host team, including relay meets. Our racing schedule was
unknown to us until our arrival at each location. One particular night
we swam a relay with every swimmer we had, each doing 50 meters.
as the host team had their whole club to choose from for their relay,
they presented quite a challenge for us. We did in fact win, but only
by inches. What excitement! Imagine 16  50 relays, with only inches
130

--- Page 145 Text ---
Applying the Art of Coaching
separating the teams.
another night the final event was a 5  100 butterfly relay in a 20-meter
pool with the winner of the meet to be determined by the outcome of the
relay. all the swimmers gave everything they had; we were halfway into
the race when our third swimmer started out so fast that every length
thereafter he seemed to be going progressively slower. he managed to
touch the wall, but didn’t have the strength to climb out of the pool. We
were so busy cheering that we didn’t notice he was sinking to the bot-
tom. as it turned out, he had swallowed water on the first turn and had
been unable to take another proper breath for the next 80 meters. having
managed to finish, he was eventually dragged, unconscious, from the
pool. We were all very relieved that he lived to tell the tale of how he
almost gave his life to help win the race and the meet for our team.
Our last meet of the tour was against the number-one ranked national
team. Once again our teams were so evenly matched that we couldn’t
afford to lose an event and having won every meet so far (five for five),
we wanted desperately to make it a clean sweep. as you can imagine,
we were very tired, and I used every means I could think of to motivate
the swimmers. at the time I had the national champion backstroker on
my team as well as a rookie who was six seconds slower. Both were
entered in the 100 backstroke event, where only two swimmers count
for points. the last thing I said to them was that I didn’t want any DQs,
so they should be sure that their turns were safe.
My rookie was really tired, feeling sick, and didn’t want to swim. I
made allowances and said that if he just went for the first 50 and let
the next 50 take care of itself, I would be happy. So, off he went over
the first 50 as planned; he made the turn safely, then looked over and
saw our national backstroke champion at his feet. Suddenly, he forgot
all thoughts of feeling sick, threw back his head, and came in second,
beating the other club’s two excellent swimmers and doing a personal
best by nearly four seconds. What had actually happened was that the
number-one backstroker had missed the wall at the first 50, and in light
of my warning about being disqualified, had gone back to make the turn
again. the rookie had seen him as he made the second turn. It just goes
to show that you should never take anything for granted; even the great
ones can make mistakes, and if you are ready for the challenge, what
seems to be your worst day could turn out to be your best.
Look Ahead
One of the future challenges in swimming that I welcome is the longevity
131

--- Page 146 Text ---
Snelling
of swimmers in competition. It appears that both men and women will
be racing successfully at the Olympic level into their 30s, and as this
trend continues, new methods of coaching will have to be developed.
coaching methods will need to be adapted, not only to accommodate
the athletes’ academic lives, as has already been done to some extent,
but also to accommodate the changing professional and social structure.
the growing professionalism within the sport is going to challenge many
coaches’ current ways of thinking and behaving. there will be more than
a few shock waves as the parties involved attempt to adjust. I believe
that we are looking at a very exciting and turbulent future for the sport.
If swimming is to continue to be popular and visible, and is to compete
for corporate support, it must become more competitive, particularly in
television and the press. Swimming must become a spectator sport, but
not at the expense of its present quality and ethics.
the 2000 Olympic year has seen the development of innovative equip-
ment, particularly swimsuits; the next trend to focus on will probably be
larger financial rewards. Look to the future, work smart and work hard,
have fun, and take one day at a time. You can live your dreams.
Summary
• there are no shortcuts to success. hard, tough training is required,
but you must also train smart.
• the ability to identify talent, desire, and ambition is one of the first
requirements of coaching.
• Be optimistically positive. catch your swimmers doing something
right and compliment them on it.
• Keep workouts challenging and fun.
• Vary morning training sessions to create more enthusiasm.
• always look for ideas to improve your basic skills and coaching
knowledge.
• emphasize team training.
• Individual medley training is productive and develops all physical
systems.
• Work to improve the confidence of each swimmer.
• attain the right mix of competition and training for each swim-
mer.
• Individualize the training and the taper for each swimmer.
• Use science to support the art of coaching.
132

--- Page 147 Text ---
Part
iv
Teach-
ing Stroke
Techniques

--- Page 149 Text ---
c h a p t e r e l e v e n
Freestyle
Technique
rick DeMont

--- Page 150 Text ---
DeMont
I was watching a documentary on the Macupingu Indians in peru who
live at the headwaters of the amazon river. they are one of the last
tribes left untouched by modern civilization. a young boy was swim-
ming with his pet tapir (a 600-pound relative of the rhinoceros that is
very much at home in the water). It was obvious that the boy had spent
a large part of his life swimming because he was like a fish in the water.
at one point he sprinted to get away from his pet and demonstrated a
beautiful freestyle stroke. this boy had never had formal swimming les-
sons; he did this naturally. I thought to myself two things:
1. he chose freestyle in order to swim his fastest.
2. Freestyle must have been around since the beginning of human
existence.
the freestyle of today probably contains most of the same elements it
has always had. Where did its alternate title “australian crawl” come
from anyway? From “aboriginal crawl,” maybe. Whatever you call it,
it is still the fastest way to get through the water for anything longer
than 15 meters.
I was taught to swim in the 1960s by ann curtis, a 1948 Olympic
champion. ann herself had a very traditional freestyle stroke. She
taught over-the-barrel high elbow catch, long strokes, and a solid kick.
I remember her harping on “technique,” often becoming angry about
sloppy swimming. It was enough to scare a seven-year-old boy. She was
passionate about technique and once even brought in her coach, charlie
Sava (who was an old man at that time), to teach us technique—same
story, different voice.
My first experience with seeing amazingly efficient freestyle technique
was watching Don Schollander swim in the 1964 Olympics on tv. he
was doing exactly what I was being taught to do at that time. he had high
elbows and a long, strong stroke driven by a solid kick. It appeared that
he was moving an immense amount of water with his arms. his turn-
over rate was slow compared to the others he was swimming against.
I thought to myself, “this is what ann is trying to teach.” a picture is
worth a thousand words.
The Two Basic Techniques
During the last 50 years, there have been basically two ways of swim-
ming freestyle. (For all I know, the two methods may go back to the first
modern Olympics.) there are obvious similarities, but the major differ-
ences between the two lie in the amount of power coming from the hip
rotation and from the kick.
136

--- Page 151 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
One method is characterized by a rapid turnover, arm-oriented stroke,
a primarily two-beat kick (sometimes four), and not much hip rotation.
this technique has been used mainly, but not exclusively, for distance
swimming. vladimir Burre, Jack Babashoff, Shirley Babashoff, and Shane
Gould used this method to sprint effectively. Using this type of stroke,
Jonty Skinner, who had a four-beat kick with a rapid turnover rate and
little hip rotation, demonstrated what I considered to be the most amazing
swim of the 1970s, going 49.4 in the 100-meter freestyle in 1976. a few
examples of distance swimmers who have used this stroke effectively
are Kieren perkins, Steve holland, and Brad cooper.
Some key elements of this “nontraditional” method of freestyle are
the following:
• very high elbow and low hand in the front third of the stroke. the
fingertip to elbow is sometimes almost perpendicular to the surface
of the water in the first third of the stroke (see figure 11.1). this is
a position not everyone can achieve.
• very little hip rotation
• rapid turnover rate
• very little power created by the kick
Figure 11.1 Nontraditional freestyle.
Some two-beat kickers do not fit into this category. For example, Janet
evans falls into a slightly different stroke class. She uses a two-beat kick
and has a rapid turnover rate, but she generates a lot of power from hip
rotation as well.
137

--- Page 152 Text ---
DeMont
the second method uses a longer, slower stroke with more power
coming from the legs and hip rotation. I call this “traditional” freestyle
because this is what I was taught as a child and because it is the form
most commonly used by successful freestylers. Most successful freestyle
sprinters have used this stroke technique including Steve clark, Don
Schollander, Dave edgar, rowdy Gaines, Matt Biondi, tom Jager, nicole
haislett, Jill Sterkel, amy van Dyken, Jenny thompson, Dara torres,
and many others. Distance swimmers who have used the traditional
method of freestyle include Brian Goodell, tim Shaw, George Dicarlo,
Figure 11.2 Traditional freestyle.
138

--- OCR from Page 152 Image 1 ---
Log ge pe RR,

--- Page 153 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
eric vendt, and ryk neethling. Some important characteristics of this
type of stroke are the following:
• a longer glide in the first third of the pull before breaking into the
catch part of the stroke (see figure 11.2)
• Greater distance gained per stroke
• a substantial amount of power generated from the kick
• Body roll and hip rotation providing additional power
Finding Your Technique
Of course, there are many variations of freestyle that use a combination
of these stroke techniques efficiently. In particular, Ian thorpe, and
aleksandr popov to a degree, combine characteristics and elements
of both methods. they combine the relatively little hip rotation of the
two-beat freestyle pull with a thunder kick, which results in a highly
effective freestyle.
For this reason, it’s difficult to say that there’s one right way to swim
freestyle. Different strokes work better for different distances. there
is no perfect stroke for everyone. there are certain aspects, common
threads, that most great swimmers share such as a relaxed recovery, a
high elbow over-the-barrel type of catch, and arm and hand angles that
produce power while moving forward. however, each swimmer has a
different pull-to-kick power ratio depending on his or her individual
strengths.
personally, I like to build a stroke or a race based on these individual
strengths. If an athlete has an incredible kick, I build the stroke around
the kick. If he or she has an awesome pull, I build the stroke around
that. If he or she has incredible rhythm, I build the stroke around that.
You do not want a swimmer to throw away any strengths in order to
correct a weakness! the bottom line is that what gets an athlete there
the fastest is best.
While strong swimming certainly depends on great strength and power,
the best swimmers figure out the minimum amount of effort that they
need to produce in order to get the maximum effect. that is the essence
of efficiency. the thing I love most is watching someone get through the
water in an amazingly efficient way. to me, one of the beauties of sport
occurs when the whole seems to be more than the sum of the parts. If
the task at hand requires a certain amount of force, it would be foolish
to expend more energy than necessary. a swimmer would not want to
use 100 pounds of force to do a 50-pound job. Many swimmers use too
much force to do the dance. thus, they die before their time.
139

--- Page 154 Text ---
DeMont
a coach must discover and have an open mind about what works for
a particular athlete, even if it is something that does not fit the classic
“perfect stroke.” With that in mind, there are some particular errors a
coach should look toward improving.
Common Freestyle Errors
• not being able to discern how fast one’s body is moving through
the water (not how fast the hands and feet are moving, but how fast
the body glides through the water)
• not keeping the elbows and shoulders up when the hand enters the
water
• letting the elbows lead the pull at any point in the first two-thirds
of the pull
• Stopping the kick to breathe
• pushing water down in the first third of the stroke
• pushing water up instead of back in the last third of the stroke
Many swimmers hang on to their old ways as if those habits were
their lifeblood. the idea of trying to integrate something new into their
stroke scares them. this kind of swimmer would rather remain a na-
tional qualifier than risk going through the process of change that could
possibly land him or her a place in the finals. a change in technique
requires repetition of the new task until it becomes a habit. as a coach,
I sometimes have to ask, “Do you want to move to the next level or re-
main the same?” In my eyes, four hours a day or more is too much time
to spend to protect “qualifier” status. Go on, take a risk! the coach must
adapt workouts to meet athletes’ needs and to help them build a stroke
or perfect their technique in order to reach their full potential. to make
changes in stroke, both coach and swimmer must reorganize training
priorities. One hundred yards of an effective stroke is worth more than
1,500 yards of a lousy stroke.
Because the pull-to-kick ratio is the aspect of freestyle that most af-
fects how swimmers find their most efficient technique, it is important
to determine the ratio of power they get from the kick and the power
they get from the pull.
today, sprinting is built from the kick. It used to be said that sprinting
was more arms than legs, but I believe that sprinting is more legs than
arms. the more power swimmers get from their legs, the more distance
they can cover with each stroke and the more water they can travel over
with each recovery. Distance per stroke and tempo are variables that
always need to be explored. this taps into the philosophy that slower
140

--- Page 155 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
turnover is faster, which may seem strange on the surface. to me, this
is the paradox of swimming. the ticket to greater speed is to be able to
control large amounts of water at the beginning of the stroke, to acceler-
ate the movement of water through the pull, and to generate power with
the kick. a basic prescription for speed is longest stroke plus strongest
kick while turning over the arms as fast as possible without missing
any available water. Swimmers who aim to lengthen their stroke should
answer the following questions:
• how far can you extend your arm in front of your body during the
stroke without losing the line of your axis?
• how far can you extend your arm behind your body during the
stroke without losing the line of your axis?
• how deeply can you pull?
• how much of the time during the pull can you sustain your hand
and arm angles as close as possible to perpendicular with the water
surface?
• how much power can you generate from your kick?
• how fast can you accelerate your pull and still keep hold of the
water?
careful consideration and review of this information with the coach
will pave the way for going to work on the specific aspects of the stroke.
the idea is for the swimmer to get the most out of the angles and to
stretch out in the stroke.
Perfecting Your Pulling
I like to break the freestyle pull into thirds when teaching it or when
drilling a more efficient technique for swimmers.
First Third of the Pull
During the first third of the pull, the hand enters the water between the
head and the shoulder. the hand position should be flat (firm, but not
tense), the fingers should be together with the thumb either in (touching
the fingers) or out. I tell my swimmers to keep the shoulder above the
elbow, elbow above the hand, and wrist above the fingertip. as the hand
pulls the water down (I call this “down and out”), it should go no farther
out laterally than the width of the hand (depending on the individual,
maybe more; see first three panels of figure 11.3). If the hand moves lat-
erally too far away from the body, it cancels out the power the swimmer
141

--- Page 156 Text ---
DeMont
Figure 11.3 Perfect your swimmers’ pulling by breaking the stroke into thirds and
dgeritllsin fgr oemac hs hthoirudl.der rotation. the swimmer needs to roll onto the water.
Middle Third of the Pull
During the middle third of the pull from the catch to the insweep at the
centerline of the body, the hand and forearm should be kept ahead of the
elbow as much as possible. the hand should go as deep as the swimmer
can handle. If the swimmer is strong enough, he or she can pull the water
with the elbow up to as much as a 135-degree angle. an interesting note
142

--- Page 157 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
is that Matt Biondi and tom Jager both went 21.8 in a 50 free, although
Biondi had much more elbow bend than Jager. Jager obtained his power
by literally reaching down deep; Biondi got his power with a much
shallower pull. this illustrates that coaches and swimmers should go
with what works! the stroke should start just outside the width of the
shoulder and sweep into the midpoint of the body, just under the belly
button (some great swimmers go past the centerline).
Last Third of the Pull
Swimmers should pull from the centerline of the body to well below the
hip joint (if a swimmer has long arms, the hand should be closer to the
knees than the hip joint.) the angle of the hand should be almost per-
pendicular to the surface of the water at the end of the stroke. (Swimmers
should not push water up into the air, they should push water down to
their feet.) Keep in mind the catch-up factor: when one hand is entering
the water, the other hand should be between one-third and one-half of
the way through the stroke.
connecting hip rotation with the finish of the stroke is a major power
source. With a six-beat kick, it is the first beat and the fourth beat that
turn the hips over.
Pulling Drills
all pulling drills can be done with a pull buoy or a kick. however, if the
kick is integrated into the drill, make sure it is nonstop. the purpose
of these drills is to perfect technique and to improve the power and ef-
ficiency of the pull.
Sculling. I like to see the motions of the hands done as fast and as small
as possible, so that the hands look just like a propeller. the following
can be done with two hands, or with one hand (alternating).
• two hands in the front third of the stroke, two hands in the
middle third of the stroke, two hands in the last third of the
stroke, with head and shoulders down so that the propulsion
moves them forward, not up
• traveling scull: two-handed scull that starts at the front of the
pull and moves slowly through to the back of the pull throughout
the course of 25 yards or meters
• lying on back, feet first, hands over head
• lying on back, feet first, hands down by hips
• Fetal position, upright with head out of water and hands out
143

--- Page 158 Text ---
DeMont
front
Dog paddle. have swimmers do small dog-paddle movements with
their hands in the front third of the stroke, keeping the head and
shoulders down. emphasize forward, not upward, movement. this
drill can be used for the middle and last third of the stroke.
Long dog paddle. Underwater version of freestyle done dog-paddle
style. recovery is nowhere near the surface.
Breaststroke pull. You may wonder what a freestyler is doing pulling
breaststroke, but the front end of the freestyle pull and a breaststroke
pull are similar. any freestyler should be able to pull breaststroke.
have swimmers do five or six breaststroke pulls without lifting the
shoulders or head out of the water (no breath) while maintaining
a solid flutter kick. then they should breathe without stopping to
kick, and repeat.
Faster arms. Want to see your swimmers scull or dog paddle fast?
Make them do a 25 without a breath and with no kick.
Perfecting Body Position and Breathing
For effective freestyle, swimmers need to establish their best body posi-
tion in the water. they should start by lying on the surface relaxed, with
head position slightly forward. If the head is held too high, then the hips
sink too deep. Swimmers should use their energy to go forward, not to
pull or push themselves down.
During the pull, swimmers should begin breathing as the opposite
hand enters the water. they should not use the front end of the pull to
hold the head up and get a breath. Make sure swimmers are just turning
the head for the breath. the breath should be on independent suspen-
sion, that is, it shouldn’t be taken by leaning on the stroking arm. the
breath is independent of the actual arm stroke and should be taken on
the rotation of the head and neck. recovery of the pull should be a very
relaxed motion.
Many of the recommendations already discussed also apply to dis-
tance swimming, the exceptions being the depth of the stroke and the
angle of the elbow. Some key points that apply specifically to distance
swimming are the following:
• Distance swimmers should not try to move every ounce of water
possible, but only the amount of water that they can move at a rea-
sonable tempo. If the tempo becomes too slow, the swimmer should
find an easier line through the water, perhaps by using a shallower
144

--- Page 159 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
pull.
• the middle third of the stroke should include an approximately
90-degree elbow bend. Straighter arms, like those used in sprinting,
are too difficult to pull for long distances.
• there is likely to be more “catch up” and glide in the front part
of the stroke for distance swimmers, especially if they have a lot
of power coming from their kick. (eric vendt is a great example of
this.)
• recovery should be very relaxed.
relaxation is one of the keys to peak performance. a good way for
athletes to relax is to key on rhythm and breathing. efficient breathing
fuels the engine and relaxes the mind and body. consciously moving
air with the diaphragm is a great, relatively unexplored source of power
in swimming. this type of breathing helps one find balance and flow
in movements.
Freestyle Drills
Sometimes coaches get into a habit of having a specific workout for-
mat that they then have trouble escaping. It is possible to run an entire
workout using nothing but drills and obtain the same benefit as the “old
square routine.”
Catch up. this drill, which involves completing a full stroke with
one arm before beginning the stroke with the second arm, is one of
my favorite drills of all time, and it is the best drill in the world for
beginners. Good freestyle can be built off the catch-up stroke for
the following reasons.
• It teaches rookies how to kick through the breath.
• It helps swimmers “square up.” It shows them where their best
leverage is at the front third of the stroke (shoulder above elbow,
elbow above wrist, wrist above fingers).
• It teaches swimmers how to roll onto the power in the front end
of the stroke.
• It helps teach swimmers the correct hand positions for taking a
breath. an interesting note is that eric vendt swims the 1,500
with basically a catch-up stroke. I’m willing to guess that his
kick is incredibly strong! Swimmers who do a catch-up stroke
without a solid kick should be punished severely (unless they
are using a pull buoy, of course)!
Catch-up variations.
145

--- Page 160 Text ---
DeMont
• hands together out front for six beats of kick before starting the
next pull.
• catch up with a pull buoy. (this can really identify pull weak-
nesses.)
• One-arm freestyle: the left arm stays down against the body, the
right arm pulls, breathing is to the left, and the swimmer main-
tains a solid kick. the swimmer’s shoulders should be square
to start the stroke. cranking the hip rotation with the last third
of the stroke will allow the swimmer to really feel the connec-
tion. at that point, the swimmer should increase the kick tempo
and power a little and see how far he or she can glide with each
stroke. reverse for the left arm pull. the swimmer should breathe
just before every pull to help get rotation on the opposite side.
Yanko. I got this drill from eric hansen, head coach of the Wisconsin
Badgers. It starts off the wall with a streamlined kick. add two
breaststroke pulls, without stopping the freestyle kick and without
breathing. Follow with a freestyle pull with one arm only. Swim-
mers should take a breath during this one-arm pull, then take two
breaststroke pulls, followed by the same thing with the other arm.
connect the finish of the pull with forceful hip rotation. Don’t let
the kicking stop!
Recovery. Freestyle kick on the surface of the water with one arm out in
front and the other arm moving slowly backward and forward, from
point of entry to point of takeout. the moving arm never touches
water—it is all done in the air. again, swimmers must use the kick
to maintain body position and get leverage to complete this drill.
repeat with the opposite arm.
Stick-it. a version of the catch-up stroke. Swimmer starts with a solid
kick that continues throughout the drill. the recovery arm stops
just before the hand enters the water and holds that position for six
beats of the kick. the hand then enters water to pull, and the other
arm comes out.
Stroke count. each swimmer swims a series of 25 yards with a specific
stroke count to target. (I work with college athletes who use 9 to 14
strokes in this drill. the count varies depending on the individual.)
In order to be effective, swimmers need to be under water the same
distance off the wall each time. Starting off with medium effort, each
swimmer must keep the same stroke count and decrease the time.
I really believe this series teaches swimmers how to swim. this is
just another version of stroke tempo. I like to tell my swimmers to
146

--- Page 161 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
imagine their hand going into the same hole in the water every time
they swim a lap. the faster they can do that, the faster they can go.
the stroke count series can also be done swimming against surgical
tubing or a power rack.
the cardiovascular system does not know the difference between
drills and regular swimming. Drills can be done fast. and drills prevent
swimmers from getting into the habit of judging their performance based
on the routine.
For example, if you have a standard set of 10  100 on 1:05, and at
some point you ask one of your swimmers to swim correctly, or to focus
on a specific detail of technique during the set, he or she may only be able
to accomplish this by swimming 1:15. the slower time might make the
athlete feel that he or she is doing the wrong thing; going slower seems
to go against swimming logic. But the goal in swimming is to build a
race, and it is the coach’s job to help build the race by convincing the
swimmer that this is the way to go. If the goal is to see a certain technique
in a race, practice only that technique. poor technique that is let go in
practice is likely to show up at the end of the race. effective technique
can only be taught by massive repetition and must become a habit.
Maximizing Your Kicking
In my opinion, most swimmers (especially beginners) use a little more
than half their available power when kicking. these swimmers have a
good downbeat but very little upbeat. Swimmers need to learn how to
feel and hold more water on the bottoms of their feet during the up kick.
the following are some drills I use to increase this skill. I like to picture
a strong kick as squeezing water with the feet. If you have a strong kick,
you can ride your kick and get over more water during your recovery.
Kicking Drills
each of these drills can also be done using fins. I especially like the fly
up kick and the freestyle kick because they increase neuromuscular
awareness of the weak part of the kick.
Streamlined kick. Swimmers keep the hands out in front for this
drill, in a streamlined position on the surface of the water. the head
should be down, but looking slightly forward, and the swimmers
should breathe straight ahead by lifting the head up without stopping
the kick or separating the hands. this is the fundamental freestyle
drill because it teaches swimmers to breathe and kick at the same
time (not doing so is the most common error made by children and
147

--- Page 162 Text ---
DeMont
experienced swimmers). the streamlined kick can also be done
while on the back or the side.
Fly up kick. this drill completely de-emphasizes the down kick and
fully emphasizes the up kick. the swimmer slips water on the down
kick on purpose, catches as much water as possible on the up kick,
then stops and glides as much as he or she can. this drill can also be
done with freestyle kick, using one leg for an entire lap (or changing
legs in the middle of the lap). the other leg stays still.
Freestyle kick. the goal is to get across the pool in as few kicks as
possible. this drill is more effectively done underwater. If the swim-
mer is getting a good up kick, he or she can squeeze water against
the other foot during the down kick. I call it “squeezing water out
the back.”
Fly kick. this is a variation on the freestyle-kick drill. the swimmer
uses the fly (dolphin) kick to get across the pool in as few kicks as
possible.
Vertical kick. In this drill the swimmers kick in an upright or vertical
position in the deep end while keeping the arms crossed across the
chest. the drill can also be done in a streamlined position or done
while holding weights or wearing a weight belt.
Barrel rolls. Swimmers do a 25-yard freestyle kick underwater while
making a complete rotation: stomach, side, back, side, stomach.
I would like to end this chapter by sharing a few words my grandfather
told me. My grandfather was a very successful high school basketball
coach in Sacramento, california. Before the race, on the few occasions
he watched me swim, he would say to me, “ricky, swim her pretty!”
looking into his eyes as he spoke, I could see a mischievous twinkle.
at the time, I could not make sense out of his statement. I was only 12.
I did not quite get it. It took me a few years to realize what he meant. he
was pointing out to me that aesthetics are very much a part of athletics.
now, as I think back on those words, I realize that he was familiar with
the dance. he wanted to see the beautiful thing occur.
Summary
148

--- Page 163 Text ---
Freestyle Technique
• Develop a passion for technique.
• there are variations in freestyle swimming; there is no one right
way for every individual.
• traditional freestyle features a long stroke, with the legs and the
hip rotation providing much of the power.
• Sprinting is built from the legs, using a kick with both a downbeat
and an upbeat.
• Body position must be correct to enable the swimmer to move for-
ward most effectively.
• the coach must match the technique to the swimmer, building on
each swimmer’s individual strengths.
• Swimmers must be willing to try new technique patterns.
• effective drills will improve the kicks.
• If a kick is used in pulling drills, it must be nonstop.
• effective technique can only be taught by massive repetition.
• relaxation is one of the keys to peak performance.
149

--- Page 165 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e l v e
Backstroke
Technique
Dick hannula

--- Page 166 Text ---
Hannula
Backstroke isn’t the most natural swimming position, and swimmers
usually aren’t attracted to this stroke in the beginning. Moving in a
backward direction and not seeing clearly what is in front of you are
disadvantages for beginning backstroke swimmers. this is certainly true
in the short run. Still, the stroke has at least one particular advantage
for the novice swimmer: swimming on the back allows the swimmer to
keep the face out of the water; therefore breathing is easier than in the
other competitive strokes. I believe a significant number of swimmers
select backstroke because of this advantage over the other strokes.
The Three R’s of Backstroke
Success in backstroke technique is best achieved by observing the three
r’s: rhythm, relaxation, and rotation. rhythm facilitates power, which is
the result of rotation. rotation refers to the hip-initiated trunk rotation
that generates stroking power and reduces drag. relaxation assists in
maintaining steady stroking power. arm recovery and breathing pattern
are the two main components of relaxation.
Rhythm and Rotation
rhythm requires the body to move past the anchored arm—the arm
underwater—evenly and with constant propulsion. the timing of the
trunk rotation to arm recovery and entry is critical in establishing effec-
tive rhythm. the ideal is to rotate the hips out of the way of the arm and
hand that is finishing the stroke. this puts the hips increasingly to the
side as the hand finishes the underwater stroke, permitting the arm and
hand to recover cleanly. the torque action also unloads the weight of
the hips and reduces drag. when the arms are just short of being oppo-
site one another, focusing on trunk rotation will help to ensure effective
trunk rotation on the arm and hand entry. proper rhythm timing and
trunk rotation will facilitate a thumb first exit, vertical recovery, and a
deep, little-finger catch on entry, all of which are essential components
for successful backstroke.
Relaxation
relaxation essentially requires the arms to recover naturally in a ballistic
type of recovery—a continuous movement from the finishing underwater
arm stroke into the recovery—as opposed to lifting or carrying the arms
into the recovery. the arm and hand also “fall” into the entry, as opposed
to being carried and placed into the entry. a regular breathing pattern,
inhaling on one arm, exhaling on the second arm, is also important for
relaxation.
152

--- Page 167 Text ---
Backstroke Technique
Blending the Three R’s
the key to successful backstroke is to blend the three r’s into a back-
stroke that optimizes distance per stroke. the optimum stroke length
is the number of strokes per pool length that is most effective for each
individual. Maximizing stroke length by reducing the number of strokes
taken for each length of the pool is only a building drill. Maximizing the
distance per stroke, in itself, isn’t the desired end. rather, optimizing
the stroke length to achieve the most effective reference for sustained
speed and to achieve the optimum effective stroking rate is the desired
goal in all competitive strokes. the kick, the arm stroke, and the coordi-
nated swimming make up the components that contribute through drills,
practice, and training to the three r’s of backstroke success.
Kick Training
the kick is a very important component of successful backstroke. legs are
important in every push off from the wall, in starts and turns, when the
butterfly dolphin kick is utilized to attain the fastest underwater speed
as well as great breakout speed in the surface strokes. the back flutter
kick is also very important in maintaining surface speed, maintaining
good body position, and keeping drag to a minimum.
the underwater butterfly kick is most effective when the body is in
a streamlined, torpedo position (figure 12.1). this kick should be from
the hips down with the upper body, from waist to head, reasonably still
and extended. this is a narrow, fast kick. the drills that are effective in
teaching the underwater butterfly kick would include most of the but-
terfly kicking drills. the following drills have proved to be effective for
this kicking skill:
Underwater Dolphin Kick Drills
Figure 12.1 The streamlined, torpedo position.
153

--- Page 168 Text ---
Hannula
• Bursts. Swimmers kick short, fast bursts underwater in a streamlined
position. It’s best to do these across the deeper end of the pool or in a
diving well in which the water isn’t too shallow. Distances of 10 to 15
yards are very effective, and timing or racing other team members can
provide increased incentive to improve this kick. Just staying underwater
for this short distance usually motivates beginning competitive swim-
mers, who have to kick fast in order to surface and breathe sooner. You
may want to shorten the distance for novice swimmers to less than 10
yards underwater, perhaps having them do only three or four fast but-
terfly kicks to start.
• Vertical kicking. this drill is done in deep water with the body in
an upright position, the head out of the water, and the arms extended
overhead. this is an effective drill when used in short bursts of 10 or
more seconds.
• Fin drills. Short swim fins and the smaller monofins such as the
“shooter” are good training tools for the underwater butterfly kick. the
short cross-pool kick drills won’t work here as the distance is too short
for the speed generated with fins. Swimmers should do these drills in
the main pool over 20 yards or more. Depending on the skill level of
the swimmers, the underwater portion of the distance covered can be
considerably less than one full length of the pool. the fin drills can also
be used in the vertical kicking sets.
• Flag drills. Kicking with fins, after pushing from the bottom of the
diving well, in an extended torpedo position and attempting to touch the
backstroke flags on the kick will also improve the speed and efficiency
of the butterfly kick. when your swimmers get good enough to reach the
flags with fins, have them try to duplicate the feat without fins.
the backstroke flutter kick is also very important to backstroke suc-
cess. the back flutter kick actually rolls from side to side due to good
trunk rotation. the kick is best when it is continuous, when it operates
in a narrow range in which the legs do not separate too much, and when
the kick initiates from the hips as much as possible. this will keep
the body position more streamlined throughout the swimming stroke.
Beginners need to learn to relax the feet and to allow them to rotate in
the kick. “Shaking” a shoe or sock off the foot while sitting in the gut-
ter and practicing the back kick is a good beginning step. I’ve used this
technique for decades, but I like what Debbie potts has done by making
a game of this: who can shake a sock off the foot first? Keeping practice
fun for young swimmers always helps to keep them in the sport.
Backstroke Flutter Kick Drills
• Arms at the sides. have the swimmer start with a flat body position
154

--- Page 169 Text ---
Backstroke Technique
to attain the best body position possible for backstroke. help each swim-
mer adjust the direction of eye focus to help get the ribcage and hips up
in the water. pressing downward on a pressure point at mid-shoulders
(or slightly lower or higher) while on the back can help the swimmer
achieve a better body position on the water. having swimmers count
the kicks—1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and repeat—will help swimmers to develop
a continuous kick and to position a starting point on the rhythm of the
kick to the arms (six kicks to each arm cycle). the torque or trunk-rotated
position can also be used with the arms at the sides (see figure 12.2).
• Arms extended overhead. Swimmers do a streamlined, torpedo
kick on the back. this is a flat position that is not a true position for
backstroke swimming, but it develops the legs and improves the flex-
ibility of the streamlined position so vital in the starts and turns. the
Figure 12.2 The torque or trunk-rotated position with arms at sides.
best body position for an individual will vary. the fingertips should
be slightly off the water in these drills to get the ribcage higher and to
increase the pressure on the legs slightly. this kicking position should
also be repeated cross pool over 10 to 15 yards without fins.
• Cross-pool. Done underwater in back flutter kick, this drill assists
the swimmer in streamlining the kick and in keeping it narrow. this type
of kick can also be done effectively with short swim fins but not cross
pool. Use the main pool and the normal pool length for fin kicking.
• One arm extended overhead. the swimmer executes this drill in a
trunk-rotated position with one arm extended and one arm at the side
of the body (see figure 12.3). Swimmers use pressure points to assist
with kicking on the side. Swimmers should focus on a pressure point
155

--- Page 170 Text ---
Hannula
Figure 12.3 The trunk-rotated position with one arm extended overhead.
that is one hand-width below the armpit and slightly behind the center
point of that side. By pressing down at the pressure point, the swimmer
should get the ribcage higher in the water, get the hips and legs up as
well, and attain the desired position to the side. the pressure point can
be adjusted up or down to meet the needs of each individual swimmer.
the “side” indicates more than 45 degrees, and near 90 degrees for some
swimmers. Drill on each side using 12 kicks on one side and then 12 on
the other, followed by 10/10, 8/8, and 6/6. Stabilize the head, and rotate
the hip-initiated trunk from side to side. another variation would be to
add the short swim fins to this kicking drill.
Perfecting Body Position and Arm Stroke
lenny Krayzelburg, 2000 Olympic gold medalist in the 100 and 200
backstroke, provides a great technique model for backstroke swimmers.
he lays well back and his head is flat on the water. Many previous
backstroke champions didn’t lay back as flat as lenny does (and conse-
quently as most of the current elite backstroke swimmers do). You can
simulate the body position lenny attains by laying your head back on a
very soft pillow; then in the pool, you can adjust the head accordingly
to bring the body and legs up higher in the water. lenny’s chest is out
of the water, and his hips are up high in the water. the high hips help
his effective hip and trunk rotation. lenny pulls wide, with the elbows
somewhat wide. he feels water quite well on his stroking arm. his hip
rotation generates more power into his arm strokes, and he attempts to
finish his stroke with a relaxed hand.
lea Mauer described her stroke as being initiated by her thinking hips
not shoulders. this is to say the trunk rotation is hip initiated, as the
great australian coach Bill Sweetenham emphasizes. Good shoulder
rotation is essential for backstroke success, but it must start from the
156

--- Page 171 Text ---
Backstroke Technique
hips. lea describes the process in this way: Once the right hand has
made its catch, she begins to think about rotating that right hip to the
up position. She wants the hip to lead the arm, and she wants to get the
hip out of the way at the finish and start of the recovery.
the arm stroke is most effective when the hand is able to maintain the
maximum hand surface and “hold” the most water. reviewing videotape
of backstroke swimmers has demonstrated to me that too many swimmers
pull with the thumb leading and the little finger trailing too early in the
stroke. this technique results in slicing or slipping the hand through the
water rather than attaining an anchored position on the water, in which
the hand is perpendicular to the water and the elbow is pointed toward
the bottom. with the hand and elbow in correct position, the hip-trunk
rotation assists the arms in driving the body past the arms. the best arm
stroke is one that has the arm entering and exiting at close to the same
spot on the water; this is not possible when the hand is slicing through
the water. to help your swimmers develop proper arm stroke, place a
full-length mirror on the deck at the end of the backstroke lane. I did
so for most of my coaching career. It saves a lot of talking; the pictures
that your backstroke swimmers see are precise and provide very accu-
rate feedback. always have the backstroke flags legally in place at every
practice session.
the specific pace of the essential progression in the arm stroke and
full stroke depends on the ability level of the swimmer. Swimmers must
master the basic technique drills before moving on to advanced drills.
all swimmers need to review basic drills on occasion.
Basic Technique Drills
1. One-arm swims. Swimmers keep the opposite arm stationary at
the side of the body. rotating the hip to the side as the arm finishes
the stroke improves the timing and rhythm of the trunk rotation.
the swimsuit should be visible and clear of the water at the hip
on the rotated upper side. this drill facilitates the feel of moving
the body past the anchored and stroking arm. variations of this
drill could include doing a specific number of strokes on one side
before changing sides, for example, four left arm strokes and then
four right arm strokes. expand this drill, when the ability of the
swimmer permits, by having the swimmer use hand paddles.
2. Backstroke swims with a plastic coin purse balanced on the fore-
head. this drill teaches swimmers to stabilize the head position.
3. Double-arm backstroke. Swimmers should recover both arms at
the same time and touch at the height of the vertical recovery. this
157

--- Page 172 Text ---
Hannula
helps to develop a vertical recovery and to get the arms entering
the water near the 12 o’clock position.
4. One-arm backstroke swims. the nonstroking arm should be car-
ried off the water at the vertical high-point position. this helps
swimmers to attain a steady, strong kick and a good deep entry
catch position.
5. Spin-out drills. these help the swimmer attain an entry near the
12 o’clock position, a vertical rifle-barrel recovery, and a “fall in”
arm entry. Swimmers should sit up high in the water, as though
they are in an undersized bathtub, and then spin and throw the
arms into a rapid backstroke turnover.
6. Swim the rope. this exercise involves a rope that is attached at
each end of the pool underwater (four to six inches underwater).
have swimmers swim on one side of the rope going down the pool
and return with the other arm on that same side of the rope. this
drill gives the feeling of anchoring the hand and elbow on the
water and rotating the trunk past the stationary arm. It also helps
to maximize the distance per stroke.
7. The “break water” drill with hand paddles. this teaches the ap-
propriate arm bend on the underwater pull. Swimmers bring the
top one-third of each paddle out of the water at about midstroke
and then finish the stroke underwater as normal.
Additional Backstroke Drills
• Touchdown swims are one-arm swims that alternate the arms after
every stroke. the stroking arm must finish at the side of the swim-
mer before the other arm, which was resting at the side, begins to
recover and stroke to that side. this drill emphasizes all the points
of the one-arm swims with one arm at the side and adds to the feel
and timing of the hip-trunk rotation.
• The touch-and-go drill emphasizes hip-trunk rotation and shoulder
rotation, the vertical rifle-barrel recovery of the arms, and a deep
catch of the hands. this exercise also encourages a continuous and
strong kick. the swimmer recovers one arm to the highest vertical
position, directly over the shoulder-chin area, and then holds that
arm there in a frozen position until the other arm recovers to that
same position. the other arm then assumes the frozen position as the
previously frozen arm takes its stroke (see figure 12.4). the swim-
mer continues to alternate arms, stroking from the frozen vertical
spot. this drill should progress to using hand paddles.
158

--- Page 173 Text ---
Backstroke Technique
Figure 12.4 The touch-and-go drill.
• Corkscrew drills aid the swimmer in attaining the feel of the trunk
moving past the arm during the stroke. the swimmer swims a
set number of strokes in freestyle, then a set number of strokes in
backstroke (seven and seven, five and five, or three and three, for
example). the transition stroke, from back to free and from free to
back, helps the swimmer to be aware of the trunk moving past the
anchored hand and elbow. the seven and seven drill would include
seven strokes freestyle and seven strokes of backstroke following
the rotation of the body into the new stroke. I strongly recommend
hand paddles in this drill as they facilitate a greater awareness of the
trunk moving past the arms, especially on the transition stroke.
• Variable sprinting drills are three-cycle sprints within any train-
ing set of kicking or swimming. For example, in a set of 12  100
backstroke kicking, the swimmer would swim a three-cycle sprint
(left arm, right arm  three) at midpool and at the end of the pool on
every length of each 100. this kind of drill contributes to a higher
stroke rate and faster turns. lenny Krayzelburg performs these drills
frequently in training.
• Stroke count sets optimize the distance per stroke. after maximizing
a swimmer’s distance per stroke by reducing the number of strokes
159

--- Page 174 Text ---
Hannula
he or she takes to swim each length, test sets can determine the op-
timum or most efficient number of strokes taken per length for each
swimmer. Using a test set of 10  50, the swimmer descends each
50 to a race-pace time while holding to the least number of strokes
necessary to attain that race-pace time. this number changes as the
swimmer’s technique and conditioning level improves. repeat this
test set with new goals as the season progresses.
• Stroke-rate sets should be introduced, in addition to the stroke-
count sets, to determine the most effective stroke rate for each
swimmer. again using the test set of 10  50, record the stroke
rate of the swimmer on each length or twice within the length of a
long-course pool. Measure stroke rate with a stroke-rate stopwatch
that records the number of strokes the swimmer would take in any
one-minute period. the race-pace time, the stroke count, and the
stroke rate will give your swimmers the foundation for sustaining
speed through the complete distance of their particular backstroke
event.
every practice session, have swimmers use a closed fist on any of the
swimming drills to help them gain a feel for the water on their hands.
then have them gradually open the hand throughout the set. as you
evaluate technique look at all your swimmers from as many viewpoints as
possible. this is especially important for backstroke swimmers because
they can constantly see you looking at them. the result is better focus on
good technique. watch from a high overhead viewpoint—a diving board,
high ladder, or some elevated platform—and from underwater. when
on the deck, move from end to end and side to side. the great canadian
coach howard Firby taught me to look at my swimmers while bent over
with my back to them, to peer out at them from under my armpit. try
this method; you will see eddies and water flow like never before.
lenny Krayzelburg combines the one arm extended and one arm at the
side kick drill with a dynamic swimming stroke. he uses a 10/10 kick
drill followed by one perfect and dynamic full swim stroke. he swims
into all turns on his kicking drills to get speed. he also likes to combine
swimming with kicking, for example, he’ll swim the first length and
kick the second length. he focuses specifically on kicking by doing 50s:
one easy, one build, then one at race pace in one breath in underwater
butterfly kicking.
Krayzelburg lifts weights after practices; this is an important part of
helping to tolerate the necessary stroke rate that he has set as a goal for
himself. he watches videotapes often to assess his technique. he always
focuses on getting his head back on his underwater butterfly kick and
160

--- Page 175 Text ---
Backstroke Technique
on the breakout.
Great technique is the result of perfect practice. every drill must be
taught correctly and then repeated in perfect form. Move from drills to
the full coordinated stroke in your training sessions. persistence is one
of the most vital coaching traits. Be persistent. Never compromise on
technique. Find many ways to say the same thing if necessary and always
remember that one picture is worth a thousand words.
Summary
• rhythm, relaxation, and rotation are the key components of suc-
cessful backstroke.
• the timing of trunk rotation is important to effective rhythm.
• Blend the 3 r’s into a backstroke that optimizes distance per
stroke.
• Optimizing distance per stroke is more important than maximizing
that distance.
• the underwater butterfly dolphin kick should be narrow and fast
coming off each wall.
• Kicking and swimming drills, in the right combination, are the best
learning methods for the component parts of the stroke.
• pressure points assist in achieving efficient body position.
• the arm stroke is most effective when the hand holds the most
water.
• progression drills build the arm stroke.
• hand paddles should be added to many of the arm-stroke drills to
further develop skills.
• Great technique is the result of perfect practice.
• Never compromise technique.
161

--- Page 177 Text ---
c h a p t e r t h i r t e e n
Butterfly

--- Page 178 Text ---
Morales
to paraphrase a swim coach i had many years ago, “Butterfly is not for
wimps.” there is perhaps nothing more instructive or appropriate than
this oversimplified assessment of the stroke to introduce a chapter on
butterfly training. it serves as a basic acknowledgment of the fact that
butterfly is not easy—from the perspective of the athletes (both aspiring
and elite butterflyers) or the coach.
For the athlete, there are first the intricacies of learning and perfecting
the mechanics of the stroke—the proper timing between simultaneous
arm pull, recovery, and dolphin kick. adding to the difficulty is the
significant strength required merely to execute a single butterfly stroke
and the resulting susceptibility of the stroke to compromised technique
or stroke decay during the course of workout or a race. (the term “easy
butterfly” is generally considered an oxymoron). then there is the subtle
blending of contrasting elements—power and explosiveness with grace
and fluidity—demanded in advanced butterfly. Finally there are the
psychological barriers to butterfly training and racing that most, if not
all, swimmers face. the coach, of course, must consider all of the above
in devising an effective training program for butterflyers.
Conditioning Aspects
of Butterfly Training
at the outset, a coach is confronted with devising a conditioning pro-
gram for a stroke form that is by nature difficult to maintain for extended
distances and repetitions. he or she therefore must first establish a solid
foundation on which to build an effective butterfly workout regimen.
this foundation should consist of at least three elements—core strength-
ening, flexibility training, and butterfly technique work—established at
the beginning of and maintained throughout the season.
i break down several important aspects of butterfly technique later in
this chapter, but maintaining good technique bears brief mention here
as an important training prerequisite. a strong foundation in proper
technique should be established, as with any of the other three strokes,
prior to beginning an extensive program of butterfly conditioning. Fur-
thermore, given the nature of butterfly training, a constant emphasis
on technique should continue during each training cycle—to such an
extent that it actually controls the scope of the butterfly conditioning
program. this is what will be referred to as a technique-based program
of butterfly training.
Core Strengthening
164

--- Page 179 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
the strengthening of the core muscles in the abdomen should be a part
of any training regimen, but it has special importance for butterflyers.
these stabilizing muscles—especially the lower-abdominal and back
muscles—are central to the undulating mechanics of butterfly, creating
a powerful kick and greater endurance in the face of the debilitating ef-
fects of workout or race fatigue.
Devoting at least a small portion each day to some form of core
strengthening is time well spent. this includes but is not limited to dol-
phin kicking on the back (in a streamlined position) or on the stomach
(face down with snorkel, arms extended and holding the back end of
a kickboard), monofin training, and the typical assortment of dryland
abdominal and lower-back exercises as well as the use of other core
strengthening devices such as medicine balls.
Flexibility Training
Most coaches would not dispute the importance of flexibility training
in any competitive swimming program. Still, many do not incorporate a
flexibility routine beyond some toe touching and a few arm stretches, and
often put off stretching until the end of the season or the taper period.
there are several benefits to be derived from a regular, comprehen-
sive, and challenging flexibility program such as an intensive active-
static (yoga) routine. these benefits include improved stroke length and
streamlined position, proper relaxation during high-effort swims, and
a lengthening of muscle fibers for increased resilience against a debili-
tating accumulation of lactate. a flexibility program also alleviates the
tightening and fatiguing effects of intense workloads, allowing for better
day-to-day workout performances during crucial times of the season.
clearly these advantages, so important to a butterflyer, should not be
put off until the end of the season but should be maximized during the
course of the season.
Technique-Based Conditioning
With a solid strength and flexibility foundation in place, a coach ready
to get to the heart of the conditioning program faces the question: “how
much butterfly is enough?” Given that a butterflyer is particularly sus-
ceptible to stroke decay (deviation from the desired stroke form to a
significantly less propulsive and efficient mode), any butterfly condition-
ing program should be sensitive to the development and preservation of
proper butterfly technique. Follow this basic guideline: train as much
butterfly—with as much intensity—as good form will allow. in practice,
this simply means that a swimmer should not swim an amount or in-
165

--- Page 180 Text ---
Morales
tensity of butterfly that is beyond that which he or she can execute with
desirable butterfly technique for the entire set. the underlying strategy
would be to establish and maintain ideal butterfly form while building
capacity over time.
there are several justifications for this seemingly conservative ap-
proach.
1. the strength requirements of the stroke make it easy for swimmers
to fall into and, consequently, to become accustomed to bad form
(what is commonly referred to as “survival stroke”); a butterflyer
can ill afford to waste energy on inefficient technique.
2. if a swimmer is constantly training with perfect form (even if, at
first, for only a minimal amount of butterfly at a time), he or she is
constantly conditioning the proper muscles and ranges of motion
associated with good technique.
3. it is a very individualized standard that takes into account the fact
that successful butterfly performances may come from individu-
als with substantially different training capacities. although the
legendary Madame Butterflyer, Mary t. Meagher, had the ability to
effectively train endurance butterfly sets that some would consider
impossible, other butterflyers have been able to reach world-class
status by training with far less butterfly than Meagher.
4. there are psychological benefits to being conservative in this way.
instilled in the swimmer is a greater sense of confidence and less
of a feeling of dread toward butterfly training (and racing), since
he or she is only doing as much butterfly with as much intensity as
he or she can execute with perfect form. Furthermore, the constant
emphasis on technique conditions the psychological mechanism
that triggers a focus on technique during the physiological stresses
of training and racing butterfly. a coach can incorporate butterfly
into endurance training (distance and short-rest repetitions), high-
quality repetition training, and sprint training.
Endurance Training
Maintaining a conservative approach to overall volume and intensity
is perhaps never more appropriate than when dealing with the longer
distance, lower rest aspects of endurance training. endurance training
may seem somewhat paradoxical when one considers the difficulty of
swimming extended distances of butterfly (beyond 100 meters, for ex-
ample) in practice without generating significant levels of lactate and
slipping into survival-stroke mode. For this reason, a coach should be
166

--- Page 181 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
very conservative about using overdistance butterfly sets (300s or 400s).
endurance training for butterfly should instead consist of
• distance work in combination with aerobic freestyle,
• extensive repetitions of shorter distances with short rest, and
• multiple cycles of repetitions with shorter rest in combination with
active-recovery freestyle.
in monitoring the following example sets, a coach should remain
vigilant against deteriorating technique by reminding swimmers to stay
focused on form and, when necessary, by adjusting the amount of but-
terfly and rest intervals if correct form cannot be maintained.
Distance (Free/Fly Combo)
Long course: sets of 300s or 400s, 25 fly/25 free, every other 50 fly, or
last 50 fly
Short course: 3  500, 12.5 fly/12.5 free
Extensive Repetition (Fly Only)
Long course: 24  50 fly with 10 to 15 seconds rest
Short course: 40  25 fly with 5 to 10 seconds rest
Extensive Repetition (Free/Fly Combo)
20  100, last 25 fly; 10 with 15 to 20 seconds rest and 10 with 10 to
15 seconds rest
12  200, last 50 fly; 6 with 25 to 30 seconds rest and 6 with 20 to 25
seconds rest
Short Repeat Cycles/Shorter Rest (Free/Fly Combo)
5  (6  25 or 50 fly, with 5 or 10 seconds rest)
5  (1  50 or 100 free, cruise interval)
High-Quality Repetitions
high-quality repetition training or, as some refer to it, lactate-tolerance
work, with its longer rest intervals, is well suited for a technique-based
system of butterfly training. the extra time allows the butterflyer to
physically recover and mentally re-establish focus on good butterfly
technique prior to the next intense repeat. But as lactate accumulates,
making it increasingly difficult to complete each repeat, a swimmer
will need to exert special effort to maintain good form during the onset
167

--- Page 182 Text ---
Morales
of stroke decay. again, it may be necessary in some instances to have a
swimmer reduce the amount of butterfly or lower the intensity or effort
level. the following are examples of high-intensity repetition training:
8  (2  50 easy free on 1:00)
8  (1  100 all out on 2:00); mostly fly
16 to 20  50 fly on 2:00 all out; record times
6 to 8 ( 100, 150, and 200 for time); from starting blocks; one set on
8 to 10 minutes
Sprint Training
although stroke decay is not typically an issue in the sample sets below,
there should be no less focus on technique than in the other two types
of training.
25s, 12.5s, six-stroke blasts from wall
Shooters: underwater 25-yard blast dolphin kicks—stomach and back,
in streamlined position; adequate rest to complete each underwa-
ter
Key Aspects of Butterfly Technique
the key aspects of butterfly technique involve two elements—the es-
sential body undulation and the arm stroke—working in isolation and
in coordination with each other. What many consider to be a third key
element—the kick—is important, but i address it as an extension of the
essential undulation. this viewpoint is in keeping with a recent emphasis
toward “front-end” butterfly (see page 171 “the arm-Stroke cycle”).
The Essential Body Undulation
the central movement, both literally and figuratively, of the butterfly
stroke is the head-to-toe undulation of the body. commonly referred to
as a dolphin or bullwhip action, it is perhaps most accurately described
as a repetitive, wave-like motion through the body. it is instigated by a
slight motion of the head and chest that achieves increasingly greater
expression as it travels down the body—to the hips, through the legs,
and, finally, to the feet, which add the essential thrust at the end of the
undulation.
Head Position and Movement
as the heavy, leading point of the body moving through the water, the
168

--- Page 183 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
head’s position and movement deserve double consideration—in the
prone, nonbreathing position and in coordination with the arm stroke
during the breathing cycle. in the prone position, muscles of the neck
should be relaxed and stretched out as the head, essentially face down,
establishes a pressure point against the water (usually at a point ap-
proximately above the forehead) that facilitates the greatest forward
motion (see figure 13.1a, page 174). it is from this position that the head
initiates the body undulation with a slight, repeating motion or rocking.
the swimmer must take care to avoid excessive motion of the head so
as to maintain the essential relaxation of the neck and the established
pressure point that assist the body in assuming the most forward-mov-
ing position. as during the breathing cycle, the head should undulate
as little as possible and stay as close as possible to the forward line of
direction.
A Balanced Hip Action and Effective Kick
probably the most crucial movement in the body undulation is the bal-
anced, or complete, hip action, which involves not only a forcing up
but also a thrusting forward of the hips (figure 13.1, a and b, page 174).
note here the necessary contraction of the lower-back muscles on the
hip-up action, and the lower-abdominal muscles and buttocks on the
thrust forward—thus, you can see the importance of the previously
mentioned core-strengthening work. a lack of hip action, especially the
forward hip thrust, is usually demonstrated by those who have trouble
generating propulsive force from their dolphin kick. there is a good
enough reason for this.
an effective and efficient kick requires that the feet assume, on both
the upbeat and the downbeat, the proper angle of propulsive thrust
against the water in a line directly opposite the desired forward line of
movement (see foot action in figure 13.1, a and b). this is accomplished,
in part, through adequate flexibility in the foot area, that is, good plan-
tar-flexion in the ankles. But the proper foot angle also comes from a
significant and balanced hip action. When the hips make substantial
movement upward and downward, the legs essentially follow the hips
along the wave path. there is a natural bending of the knees as the legs
trail along this path. next to follow are the feet, which, in aligning on this
naturally bending wave, achieve the proper thrust angle. Where there is
no forward hip action, the wave motion halts, and in order to position
the feet in the proper angle the swimmer must provide a forceful and
deliberate bending of the knees in excess of the bending that naturally
occurs in the course of the wave action. this is because the feet, being
at the end of a shorter line (from knee to foot as opposed to hip to foot),
169

--- Page 184 Text ---
Morales
require a more radical bending of the knees to achieve the desired foot
angle. this radical movement creates undesirable resistance—not to
mention more work for the swimmer—resulting in a downward cycle
of energy expenditure. Briefly stated, having the knees stay on the body-
wave line not only allows the feet to reach the proper thrust angle but
also creates much less resistance against the water than an unnatural,
excessive bending of the knees.
The Kick—A Propulsive Finish to the Body Wave
the kick is the propulsive force generated at the end of the body wave.
it encompasses the thrusting of the feet (which have achieved the proper
angle) and the powerful contraction of the hamstrings and quadriceps.
it may be viewed as an additional action or an extra explosive force at
the end of the wave—like the snapping of a whip or the exclamation
mark at the end of a sentence. regardless, its effectiveness depends on
the correct body undulation.
Despite its propulsive properties, the swimmer should take care not to
“overkick” to the point of excessive undulation or bending of the knees.
the kicking action should be relatively tight and steady, yet powerful,
within the body line. the effects of an excessive kick are addressed later
in this chapter in a section dealing with the kick in coordination with
the arm stroke (see page 176). From this point forward, the traditional
term “kick” or “kicking” will refer to the complete body undulation that
includes the propulsive foot thrust at the end of the wave action.
although it may be viewed as being dependent on and governed by
the body undulation, kicking remains an important part of the butterfly
training program. the isolation of the kick—whether through intense
kicking sets or drills—builds leg strength, increases foot and ankle flex-
ibility, and enforces proper hip undulation.
Kicking sets and drills can be done in a variety of positions—on the
back, stomach, or side; with arms up or down—and using an assortment
of equipment, including different styles and sizes of kick boards and
fins—long fins, short fins, monofins. coaches have employed monofins
with increasing regularity as an effective training device. Monofin train-
ing and drills teach the proper wave action of the body (especially the
hips), improve plantar-flexion, build core and leg muscle strength, and
improve streamlining ability.
the following sets and drills are designed to help condition the legs
and to teach or improve the essential body undulation.
Dolphin kick on back
• 8  200 streamlined or on stomach with board, descending 1-3,
170

--- Page 185 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
4-6, 7-8.
• 8  100, hands down; all fast, best average.
Sidekick drill. Bottom arm extended, top arm down, alternating sides.
emphasize complete hip action behind and in front of imaginary
central line down the body.
Monofin. repeat blast 25s, moderate to short rest, 8  100 with each
25- to 15-meter underwater blast in streamlined position (alternat-
ing on back and stomach) plus sidekick drill (alternating right and
left sides) into flip turn.
Vertical kicking with weight. emphasize strictly vertical position and
balanced hip action.
Kick and swim. 8  100, 50 dolphin kick/50 fly, moderate rest, de-
scending 1-3, 4-6, 7-8 (6 faster than 3, 8 faster than 6).
Shooters. 25 repeats; odd-numbered ones should be underwater blast
dolphin kicks; even-numbered ones should be sprint butterfly.
Hands-down dolphin kick on stomach. With center-mounted snorkel,
with and without monofin. emphasize maintaining neck relaxation
and forward-moving pressure point despite the slight “rocking”
motion of the head.
The Arm-Stroke Cycle
the second element of butterfly technique is the arm-stroke cycle, a
double-arm pull down the body underwater followed by a “flying” arm
recovery above the water. this motion in coordination with the essen-
tial body undulation results in the powerful, yet beautifully rhythmic,
butterfly stroke. Over the years, subtle variations of style within this
basic butter-fly technique have been demonstrated by many successful
butterflyers.
recently, a trend toward “front-end butterfly” has developed. Gen-
erally, it reflects a greater emphasis on the front half of the stroke or
a shifting forward of balance from the back end of the stroke behind
the hips (basically, the legs) to beyond the hips (the upper body). the
various characteristics of the front-end butterfly have been successfully
developed and demonstrated in the careers of world-record holders
Denis pankratov, Michael Klim, and Jenny thompson. the butterfly
development of thompson, in particular, illustrates the evolution of
this technique.
Initial Scull and Power Phase
the breakdown of the butterfly arm stroke begins at the top end of the
cycle—arms extended above the head, hands positioned just inside the
171

--- Page 186 Text ---
Morales
imaginary lines extending forward from the shoulders (see figure 13.1b,
page 174). From this position, the hands scull, or press, outward and
downward. the outward press ceases as the hands reach a point just
outside the shoulder line. the hands complete their downward motion
at a point just below the relative level of the elbows, as the fingertips
rotate downward toward the bottom of the pool. at the same time, the
palms rotate inward so that they face directly behind the swimmer. this
is the ideal “catch” position (figure 13.1c, page 174).
With a slight flexing of the arms and bending of the elbows, the power
phase of the stroke begins. there is an initial pulling back of the hands
in a line moving directly opposite the intended forward line of direction
(figure 13.1d, page 174). as the hands reach the chest line, the direct
pull back ceases temporarily as the palms turn inward, and an insculling
of the hands occurs until the hands nearly touch at a point just below
the chest line (figure 13.1e, page 174). here the palms turn back and the
direct pull back of the hands, which are now closer together, resumes
(figure 13.1f, page 175).
it is preferable that this insculling occur sooner (approximately at the
chest line) than later (toward the end of the pull). Setting the hands at
the chest allows for a quicker, easier exit of the hands at the end of the
pull leading to the arm recovery. the hands remain in ideal pitch for
a longer, uninterrupted period of time, allowing the swimmer to build
more momentum for the quick and efficient exit. Later insculling results
in less time to build momentum for the exit and arm recovery phase and
may lead to the hands getting stuck at the bottom or to an inefficient,
longer pull.
Pull Through and Exit
this raises the final consideration of the pull phase: at what point should
the pull of the hands cease and the arms exit the water? the hands should
pull through to a point at which they maintain, in the proper pull-back
position, ideal force against the water prior to the natural raising of the
fingertips that occurs at the extreme bottom end of the stroke. When the
fingertips rise, the hips are pulled down and the hands no longer exert
force against the water (figure 13.1g, page 175). the exit is delayed by
a longer stroke, which significantly reduces the momentum necessary
for a quick and efficient transition to the arm recovery.
in front-end butterfly, the hands pull back only to the final point at
which they maintain maximum force against the water rather than wast-
ing time with an additional, ineffective “overpull” at the bottom. also,
because the front-end flyer uses an earlier inscull, he or she creates mo-
172

--- Page 187 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
mentum for a quick, efficient exit leading to the arm-recovery phase.
Arm Recovery
the expedient exit of the hands (in addition to the timing of the sec-
ond kick, to be discussed later) creates momentum for arms to swing
outward above the surface of the water. the arms essentially maintain
the extension achieved during the pull-through and exit phases. here,
relaxation of the arms is crucial. a tightening or bending of the arms
slows the momentum of the outward swinging motion. it also hinders
the forward extension of the arms and shoulders at the top end of the
recovery before the landing (figure 13.1, h and i, page 175). the arms
should be so relaxed that they feel like dead weight being thrown forward.
in this way, the swimmer preserves the greatest amount of momentum
in the arm recovery and reaches ideal extension in the front end of the
stroke. For the front-end flyer, this relaxed speed of recovery and ideal
forward extension, combined with only the most efficient amount of
pull through and a quick exit, facilitates a quicker return to the power
phase and a more constant, forward-moving action.
Head Motion—Breathing and Nonbreathing Cycles
the swimmer should maintain the essential head position—face down
with relaxed neck—as much as possible during breathing and nonbreath-
ing stroke cycles (see figure 13.1b, page 174). in the latter, the initial
hand press raises the head slightly to the surface level, and this position
is maintained during the arm pull. the head begins to drop downward
as the hands exit the water, and it continues to do so during the arm
recovery. During a breathing cycle, the head’s motion is the same except
that there is slightly more pressing to help raise the head high enough
for the mouth to take in air. note that here, as in the nonbreathing cycle,
the raised head should remain as much as possible in the essential head
position. the result is the leaning forward of the head at this breathing
apex. in contrast, the traditional breathing motion involves a lifting up
of the head; with a tense contraction of the neck muscles, the chin is
pushed forward, resulting in further upward turning of the top of the
head. in the leaning position, the head and neck, which remain relaxed,
are aligned on an angle closer to the surface and the forward moving line
of direction. the leaning motion creates significantly less up-and-down
activity than the traditional breathing motion.
From a side-viewing perspective, the head-leaning breath is very
noticeable in front-end flyers such as pankratov, Klim, and thompson.
From a front-facing view, less of the face (especially the chin) and more
of the top of the head are visible with this method than with traditional
173

--- Page 188 Text ---
Morales
a
b
c
d
e
Figure 13.1, a-e Sequence of action for the butterfly.
174

--- Page 189 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
f
g
h
i
Figure 13.1, f-i Sequence of action for the butterfly (continued).
175

--- Page 190 Text ---
Morales
breathing. Watching pankratov, for example, from behind, however, it
is difficult to discern a head-leaning breathing stroke—with its more
constant head and neck angle and limited up-and-down head move-
ment—from a nonbreathing stroke as he swims away.
there is an additional benefit of the head lean. Because it is a less tense,
more relaxed position, the arms and shoulders can achieve more of an
unhindered reach at the end of the arm recovery, prior to the landing.
The Landing
recall that as the arms swing around toward the front of the stroke,
the head and neck are dropping toward the water. there should be a
simultaneous landing of the arms and head in the water (on the non-
breathing cycle, there is a simultaneous arm-landing and lowering of the
head as it returns to its original position). this way—to borrow a theory
promoted by stroke analyst Bill Boomer—the head and arms, landing
together, combine as an effective throw weight. this throw-weight effect
is enhanced by the momentum of the arms swinging forward and the
forward alignment of the leaning head position.
to conclude the cycle, the hands enter just inside the shoulder line
with the arms extended but relaxed enough to allow for additional ex-
tension as the hips rise and the head presses forward against the water.
at this point, the hands begin their press outward and downward, and
the new arm-stroke cycle begins.
Undulations and the Arm Cycle
there should be two undulations, or kicks, per each arm-stroke cy-
cle—one at the top end of the stroke (see figure 13.1a, page 174), or the
landing of the head and arms, and another as the hands complete the
pull-through phase (see figure 13.1e, page 174). there are successful but-
terflyers who have used a “single-beat” kick, but they are typically 200
butterfly specialists and even then it is more the exception than the rule.
the motion of the arms in coordination with the steady, uninterrupted
tempo of body undulations creates the essential butterfly rhythm.
again, the kicks should be relatively tight and steady within the line
of body undulation. an excessive reliance on the second kick as the
hands complete the pull-through phase at the bottom is characteristic of
a predominantly back-end butterflyer. this type of kick not only causes
extra resistance but also takes longer to complete, and thus interrupts
the rhythm of arm-stroke and undulation. this results in the previously
mentioned delay or overpull of the hands at the bottom.
in front-end butterfly, the second kick is not excessive but, like the
first, effective and efficient. it assists rather than undermines the crucial
176

--- Page 191 Text ---
Butterfly Technique
quick exit of the hands, transferring momentum into the arm-recovery
phase and leading more expediently to the next power-generating arm
stroke.
Front-End Butterfly—
The Shifting Forward of Balance
to review, the following are elements of front-end butterfly: the early
inscull at the beginning of the underwater pull phase; pulling back
only to the final point that the hands can exert maximum force against
the water (the absence of overpull); a swinging, relaxed arm recovery; a
face-down head position with a relaxed neck; a leaning-head breathing
position; the simultaneous landing of the arms and head; steady, effec-
tive, and powerful kicks (no overkicking); and a quicker, steadier stroke
tempo overall.
the combined effect of these elements shifts forward the balance on
the pivot point (the hips)—from the back half to the front half of the
body—and essentially keeps it forward. think of two children, one
heavier than the other, playing on a teeter-totter; the front-end flyer ap-
pears to be constantly diving forward, or teetering, to the front side.
Jenny thompson’s development from national-level butterflyer to
world champion and world-record holder is a product of the trend to
front-end butterfly. as a talented, national-caliber butterflyer, thompson
demonstrated traditional technique, using elements of back-end butterfly
such as a strong second-beat kick and an up-and-down breathing mo-
tion. her elevation to one of the world’s best coincided with front-end
adjustments she made—the head-leaning breathing position; balanced,
effective kicks; an efficient amount of pull-back prior to exit; and the
simultaneous landing of her arms and head. her overall hip position
now remains high as she constantly teeters forward with a quick and
steady tempo of arm strokes. Since her current form emphasizes the
most efficient, forward-moving motions and minimizes, or eliminates,
inefficient ones, there is little interruption of the forward motion; each
one of her strokes builds on the momentum of the previous stroke.
clearly, the trend toward front-end butterfly is not absolute. as with
all stroke improvements, use of the front-end techniques depends upon
a swimmer’s particular strengths and abilities. Still, with a stroke gener-
ally considered grueling, a technique that emphasizes relaxation, bal-
ance, and rhythm to yield forward motion and to eliminate inefficient
movements has a certain appeal. also appealing is a technique-sensitive
program of conditioning, which is by no means easy but takes into ac-
177

--- Page 192 Text ---
Morales
count various levels of butterfly training capacities. perhaps butterfly, as
my coach from years ago stated, will never be for the faint-hearted, but
with continued improvements in training and technique, it may become
easier to endure.
Summary
• Butterfly combines power and explosiveness with grace and fluid-
ity.
• the butterfly foundation includes technique work, core strengthen-
ing, flexibility training, endurance training, high-quality repetitions,
and sprints.
• any butterfly conditioning program must be sensitive to the de-
velopment and preservation of proper butterfly technique; train as
much butterfly as good form allows.
• high-quality repetition training, with its longer rest intervals, is
well suited for a technique-based system of butterfly training.
• the central movement in butterfly is the head to toe undulation of
the body, or wave-like action.
• a balanced hip action is essential to an effective kick, the propulsive
finish to the wave.
• the knees must stay on the body-wave line throughout the kick.
• the recent trend is front-end butterfly with two kicks per arm
cycle.
• the recovery is done with relaxed arms; the landing of the arms
and head must be simultaneous.
• the face-down head position is the essential head position.
178

--- Page 193 Text ---
c h a p t e r f o u r t e e n
Breaststroke
Technique
David Salo

--- Page 194 Text ---
Salo
We have had our share of excellent breaststroke swimmers coming
through the ranks of our club program, Irvine novaquatics, includ-
ing 100-meter american record-holder amanda Beard and 1999 pan-
american Games gold medalist Staciana Stitts. amanda was the silver
medalist in the 100 and 200 breaststroke events at the 1996 olympics
and was the bronze medalist in the 200 breaststroke at the 2000 Games.
Staciana also represented the united States at the 2000 Games in the
breaststroke, earning a gold medal for her breaststroke leg in the prelims
of the 400 medley relay. While I tend to view breaststroke in terms of
the basic important characteristics of the ideal stroke, I also leave room
for individual variation.
It is important to realize that the nature of the breaststroke is such that
the many variations in stroke seen at every level of competition result
from variations in human anatomy as much as differences in skill acqui-
sition. Witness any competition and you will see very successful swim-
mers with tremendously different approaches to the stroke. anatomical
considerations influencing the stroke are ankle, knee, and hip flexibility,
as well as shoulder flexibility; flexibility affects the range of motion of
the limbs and thus influences heel recovery speed, acceleration of the
arm-stroke insweep, and so forth. of course, there are also differences
in muscle-fiber content percentages—that is, some swimmers have a
higher percentage of fast-twitch fibers versus slow-twitch fibers; the ratio
affects the speed or turnover of their stroke. Some swimmers’ strokes
are characterized by a strong kick, while others have a kick-dominated
stroke (not necessarily the same thing). these different types of stroke
may produce equally successful results.
throughout the 1990s the breaststroke became more popular, largely
because of the tremendous success of 200-meter breaststroke world-re-
cord holder Mike Barrowman. Barrowman singlehandedly elevated the
200-meter breaststroke to a glamour event through his focus on the one
event, his specific training for the stroke, his progressive improvements,
and his competitive dominance. his “wave style” approach to the stroke
was new, facilitated by rules changes over the past several decades that
allowed the head to submerge with each stroke. his technique did much
to influence the development of the mechanics of breaststroke as we know
it today. While the strokes of a growing majority of today’s breaststroke
swimmers are characterized by a wave-like action, in which the body
seemingly glides over the water surface and lunges into each stroke, our
program’s approach to breaststroke technique follows some basic tenets
that may or may not be considered strictly “wave style.”
one criterion that characterizes effective breaststroke is the speed of
hand and heel action, because these actions result in forward propul-
180

--- Page 195 Text ---
Breaststroke Technique
sion. having mastered the biomechanics of the pull and kick, a swimmer
should focus attention on the speed and acceleration of hands and heels
in order to develop a successful competitive breaststroke.
The Pull
one of the most important criteria to the overall success in breaststroke
is the recovery of the pull into a full streamlined position. the stream-
lined position, no matter how brief, assures full extension and therefore
maximum distance per stroke. one of the major problems for breaststroke
swimmers in competition is that they shorten their stroke when they
become fatigued—and they lose some turnover rate with full extension.
therefore, I stress to swimmers the need to extend into the outsweep
of the stroke.
I consider the pull of the stroke to be triphasic, or composed of three
phases: outsweep, insweep, and recovery. the outsweep is a “setup”
for the more propulsive insweep phase; emphasizing a constant veloc-
ity through the outsweep leads to an accelerated insweep phase. If you
consider the swimmer as moving through horizontal sheets of parallel
planes of water, during the outsweep the arms would remain straight and
confined to a plane near the surface of the water (within 6 to 10 inches).
at the widest part of the stroke (generally 12 to 18 inches beyond the line
of the shoulder, depending on individual strength) the insweep begins to
take form (figure 14.1). It is characterized by increased velocity through
the pull to the recovery phase.
the insweep continues as the inside (thumbside) edge of the arms (I
refer to this as the blade of the arms) begins to take the lead with the
Figure 14.1 The outsweep sets up the insweep.
181

--- Page 196 Text ---
Salo
Figure 14.2a The blade leads the insweep.
Figure 14.2b The insweep continues.
insweep. this edge extends from the fingertips to the elbow. consider
this edge as cutting through the series of parallel planes of water with
the elbows maintaining their position closely within the original plane
(figure 14.2, a and b). the blade therefore cuts through these planes much
like a propeller cuts through water, creating resistance and propulsion
on the inside of the arm. through the completion of the insweep the
swimmer’s hands come toward each other, with the elbows trailing,
and end close together. the position of the hands at this point should
be above the level of the elbows as the swimmer begins the recovery
phase. throughout the insweep phase the shoulders and back lift while
driving the hips forward toward the original position of the chest (figure
14.3). coaches will want to stress this to prevent their swimmers from
creating too much upward motion, thereby sacrificing forward move-
ment. During this phase the elbows remain fairly close to their original
planar position.
as the insweep is completed the hands are close together (within inch-
es) and the elbows are no farther apart than the width of the shoulders.
Becoming as streamlined as possible, so as to reduce drag and accelerate
182

--- Page 197 Text ---
Breaststroke Technique
Figure 14.3 Completing the insweep and beginning the recovery.
into the completed recovery phase, is extremely important at this point.
While many swimmers will place significant effort on lifting the hands
out of the water at the finish of the insweep, I believe this can be coun-
terproductive. I stress completing the insweep with the hands just at the
surface, in front of the chin, and elevated above the level of the elbows.
a straight elbow through fingertip position should be maintained, and
the swimmer should then drive the blade (elbow to fingertips) straight
forward at or near the surface (figure 14.4). as the arms recover, the head
maintains a position in line with the back and settles between the arms,
ending the stroke cycle in a streamlined position (figure 14.5).
The Kick
Figure 14.4 Driving the blade forward.
183

--- Page 198 Text ---
Salo
Figure 14.5 The recovery.
the breaststroke kick may be divided into two phases: set-up and pro-
pulsive. In the set-up phase the heels are driven from the extended,
streamlined position to a position at the hip. then in the propulsive
phase the heels accelerate in an elliptical pattern as the pressure of the
water against the bottom of the feet is maintained (figure 14.6). the big-
gest mistake breaststroke swimmers make in kicking is the result of the
manner in which they train. Most training places very little emphasis on
the set-up phase of the kick, specifically the acceleration of the heels. the
heels should be drawn up to-
ward the hips with maximum
speed; then the toes are turned
outward and downward to
initiate the propulsive phase.
the heels should continue to
be the leaders of the kick; with
heels in position outside the
knees, propulsion begins. the
heels take an elliptical path as
the legs are extended. pressure
is maintained on the bottoms
of the feet. at full extension
the heels come together, and
the completion of the kick oc-
curs as the toes are extended
to maximize the streamlined
position.
the question of how wide
Figure 14.6 The propulsive phase
of the kick.
184

--- OCR from Page 198 Image 1 ---
Figure 14.5 The recovery.

— 7. —tes6htl ett ~e 1 7.

--- Page 199 Text ---
Breaststroke Technique
the kick should be, as with the arm pull, depends on the individual
swimmer’s characteristics of strength and flexibility in relation to the
capacity of the pull. this will become obvious to the coach through
observation and experimentation. coaches and swimmers need to as-
certain these characteristics in order to fine-tune the appropriate width
of the kick and pull. training considerations should employ various
widths of outsweep to develop a greater range and to develop strength
and power throughout the range. It is important that the kick not delay
the swimmer’s arm stroke. If the kick is too wide, the arms have to wait
for the kick.
Stroke Timing
In my mind there are certain components of the breaststroke in which
timing can be evaluated and corrected. With regard to the pull I look
at the velocity of the outsweep and insweep; in particular I look to see
that there is a relatively constant velocity through the outsweep with an
increase in velocity through the insweep and into the recovery.
In developing proper timing in the arm and leg action of the breast-
stroke, it is important to remember that each stroke begins and ends in a
streamlined position. from this position, the arm stroke helps to define
the timing pattern of all other actions of the hips and heels. While the
body remains relatively flat during the initial phase of the outsweep, it
is through the phase of the arm-stroke insweep that the swimmer needs
to drive the shoulders up and toward the ears while driving the hips
forward. the action of the hips will help to drive the heels toward the
hips. at the completion of the insweep the focus should be on kicking
the hips forward and driving the shoulders and arms forward—back to
a streamlined position.
With regard to the kick and the initiation of the heel recovery, I sug-
gest that the swimmer view the recovery part of the kick as beginning
with the outsweep of the pull such that as the recovery phase of the pull
begins, the propulsive phase of the kick occurs nearly simultaneously.
there should be a sense that during the propulsive phase of the arm
stroke, the recovery (and hence the drag phase) of the heels is occurring,
and that during the recovery of the stroke, the propulsive phase of the
kick occurs.
Component Training
I believe that the most effective means of training for the breaststroke is
through component training. the major problem in training breaststroke
185

--- Page 200 Text ---
Salo
occurs when the stroke is not maintained throughout a workout or set;
mechanics such as proper timing, body position on the water, appropriate
streamlining characteristics, and heel and hand or blade speed must not
be allowed to suffer. continuous long sets of breaststroke can do more
damage than good by drilling improper mechanics.
component training involves breaking down the stroke into its com-
ponents and training each at high rates of velocity. components are more
specific than kick and pull; they include all elements of stroke mechan-
ics: elbow position, straight arm recovery, heel speed, blade speed, flat
back at extension, and so forth. for example, elbow position during the
stroke is very important. to emphasize this in training we have developed
a drill called the scrunch scull. In this drill, swimmers are poised in a
vertical position with the head and shoulders out of the water. Knees
are bent and held in front of the chest, with the heels positioned below
the hips. the swimmer performs a breaststroke pull forward with the
elbows held in a high position, without pulling the elbows back. the
“blades” sweep across the knees, and forward extension is carried out
with high velocity. this drill accomplishes significant aerobic objec-
tives as well as specific training for the breaststroke pull. an example
of a set that might also serve as an aerobic training set is 10  100 on a
15- second rest interval, 25 streamlined kick, 25 scrunch scull, 25 pull,
25 scrunch scull.
Breaststroke swimmers in our program probably do 70 precent to 80
percent of their training in breaststroke components, with only about 25
percent to 30 percent of that involving the whole stroke. this ensures that
they maintain a very high level of velocity throughout their training.
other suggested drills include various sculling drills in different body
positions, breaststroke pull and free or fly kick, and piston kicking—in
which the swimmer maintains a horizontal body position on the water
creating propulsion by kicking, alternating legs in a piston-like mo-
tion.
Training Yardage
throughout our season, very little changes in terms of overall training
yardage requirements. from day one of any given season, most of our
work is performed at race velocity with an average practice session con-
sisting of less than 6,000 yards. except for morning workouts from June
to august, training is conducted in a short-course pool. I believe that
it is advantageous to the breaststroke swimmer to train in short-course
pools throughout the year as opposed to relying on long-course pool
training. Short-course training allows swimmers to maintain the kind
186

--- Page 201 Text ---
Breaststroke Technique
of stroke mechanics and speed that are lost with excessive long-course
training; it is easier to maintain high-speed intensive training when
the distance from wall to wall is relatively short. Long-course training,
however, promotes timing of the stroke and develops pacing strategies.
prior to the 1996 united States olympic trials, amanda Beard had only
two workouts long course (for a total of two hours) while Steve West
(olympic trials third place in the 200 breaststroke; fourth in the 100
breaststroke) had a total of five long-course workouts. Both swimmers
performed significant lifetime bests at the trials.
the taper phase, also known as the fine-tuning phase, of our season
occurs over the final 10 days prior to the major competition. During this
period the yardage drops almost immediately to 2,000 to 3,500 yards with
more focus on long, stretched-out swimming interspersed with periods of
fast, intense, short swims. I don’t time pace 50s or other cruise intervals,
as this is a period in which I want swimmers to feel their stroke in the
water and to have confidence in their technique rather than focusing on
their time. During this period we fine-tune the starts and turns, stroke
timing, and so on. a great deal of time is spent during the last month
and a half on relaxation and visual imagery training.
Who can predict the changes in breaststroke that will allow swimmers
to swim faster in the future? over the past 40 years there have been more
rule changes affecting breaststroke than any other stroke. the current
wave style of breaststroke will produce faster swimmers in the years to
come, as more young age-group swimmers use the style over many years
and gain experience in the stroke.
Summary
• a swimmer’s individual anatomical considerations influence his
or her breaststroking style.
• the speed of the hand or blade and heel action and the recovery to
streamlined position are fundamental for success.
• pulling includes three phases: the outsweep, the insweep, and the
recovery phase.
• the outsweep—made with straight arms and near the surface—sets
up the insweep, the more propulsive phase.
• recovery should occur straight forward, not downward, to reduce
drag.
• the kick should focus concentrated effort on heel speed, especially
in the recovery phase.
187

--- Page 202 Text ---
Salo
• Velocity must be maintained through the outsweep and increased
through the insweep into the recovery.
• the heels lead throughout the kick, maintaining pressure on the
bottom of the foot.
• the propulsive phase of the kick occurs nearly simultaneously with
the recovery to streamlined position.
• the most effective way to train for the breaststroke is through com-
ponent training at high rates of speed.
• Swimmers should focus on the feel of breaststroke in the final taper
preparation.
188

--- Page 203 Text ---
c h a p t e r f i f t e e n
Starts, Turns,
and Finishes
John trembley and Gary fielder

--- Page 204 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
how many times have you heard, “he’ll never make up the distance he
lost at the start,” or “She threw the race away in the turn,” or “he lost
it at the wall”? too many times? While we all know how critical it is to
practice the starts, turns, and finishes of each race, don’t we often let
the standards slip during training, while concentrating on other things?
Whether it’s a drill, swim workout, or even a kicking set, every push
off, dive, turn, and finish presents another opportunity to perfect the
techniques that win races.
throughout this chapter we’ll refer to turns as “changes of direction,”
as this is what the swimmer is trying to accomplish. this is not just a
matter of semantics, but a difference in concept that suggests a different
visual image. the implication of the word turn is a twisting movement at
the wall that considerably slows the change of direction. a rapid change
of direction at each wall is the swimmer’s objective.
We speak of starts, changes of direction, and finishes as separate enti-
ties, just as we segregate each component of a stroke in order to perfect
it. each of these entities can be different depending on the stroke or
event. What we must not forget is that each is a part of the whole of the
event; there should be a seamless continuity to an entire performance.
Let your movements be as fluid as the medium in which your chosen
sport is played.
Freestyle Starts
Swimmers spend a lot of time practicing strokes so that technique be-
comes automatic. Starts are no different and should be practiced accord-
ingly. every time swimmers step on the block, they should immediately
place their feet ready for the start; by making this a habit they can’t be
rushed into taking their position for a start. When swimmers assume the
mark position, their hearing and reflexes should focus on the start signal.
for that short space of time, noting else exists but that signal. adhering
to this routine will make every start the same and will minimize the
chance of a false start while maximizing the reflex response for a quick
start. Simple, but it works.
the good start is a combination of balance and power. By holding
under the block and pushing up with the legs, a swimmer increases the
tension on the required muscles (the stretch-reflex action). this increase
in muscle tension, just prior to the signal, yields an increase in explo-
sive power. as the signal goes and the swimmer pulls down under the
block, the center of gravity moves forward, past the point of balance. at
this point the swimmer drives with the legs and throws the arms and
190

--- Page 205 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
Table 15.1
Common Start Errors
Error Negative result
Thumbs resting on top of block Too much time is required to move thumbs forward
elbows bent too much Center of gravity becomes lower, reducing the
potential for height and distance as one leaves the
block
Squatting too much Ineffective hip and leg extension position resulting in
a slower start
leaning back too far body mass centered away from the water yields a
slower start
Head moves too much Unless the head motion contributes to the body
driving off the block, it should not move
Pike entry Increased drag
head forward to assist in overcoming inertia. he or she drops the head
between the arms and hyperexends the body for a clean entry flowing
immediately into a fast, narrow butterfly kick. the best starters are fast
off the blocks; they get great distance through the air with a clean entry
and a strong kick. these techniques are not hard to develop; some solid
practice will result in much-improved starts.
Since you hold at least 200 and as many as 600 practices a season, it
is imperative that you begin each practice with a maximum-effort start.
the plyometric and strengthening benefit will give your swimmers a
better start in races. also, by beginning with some seriousness, you set
a positive tone for the remainder of practice. here are some techniques
to work on during practice.
Block Starting Techniques
• Dry block with towel. have swimmers get into the habit of making
sure the block is dry before the start. Going over the block with a
towel also ensures that a towel is available in the event of a false
start or overheating.
• Ready throw. have swimmers work on making sure that their hands
move fast and that their elbows are straight.
• Ready throw jump. Swimmers should work on throwing their arms
and extending their legs at takeoff. Swimmers who jump well do
191

--- Page 206 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
so by extending beyond the balls of the feet up through the big toe.
this puts tremendous pressure on the soleus muscles in the lower
legs. to feel this pull in the soleus for yourself, rock forward and
upward from the ball of the foot onto the big toe. train your swim-
mers to jump through the ball of the foot and to use the big toe.
• Track start. this technique, in which one foot is more forward on
the block than the other, requires tremendous explosion of the arms
and the back foot (figure 15.1, a and b). Swimmers should hyperex-
tend on entry to the water and begin kicking immediately.
• Grab start. in the grab start, swimmers work on leaning their body
mass forward and jumping through their big toe (figure 15.1c).
a b c
Figure 15.1, a-c The track start (a and b) and the grab start (c).
Freestyle Change of Direction
the objective here is to achieve a smooth, fast change of direction with
minimal time spent in contact with the wall. as swimmers approach the
wall, they should use the painted T as a visual cue to start preparing for
the change of direction. they should not breathe from this point in, as
that would require them to take their eyes off the wall. it will take each
swimmer some practice to establish the exact point at which to begin the
final pull stroke. it should be at the same place each time, as it initiates
the change of direction sequence.
the second to last stroke finishes with one hand at the side, palm
down, and the other arm at full extension (figure 15.2a). the leading
hand pulls through on the final stroke, and as the hand passes under,
the body rotates in the vertical plane (figure 15.2b). as the body begins
to rotate, the arms remain extended behind the swimmer and rotate me-
dially until the palms face down (figure 15.2c); then they make a short,
sharp pull from the elbows to assist body rotation.
192

--- Page 207 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
throughout the body rotation, the feet are carried over the surface of
the water (the water line should be at a midpoint between ankle and knee)
with the legs bent and slightly apart to allow water to pass between them.
a tight tuck will keep the heels close to the surface and will produce a
faster rotation. the swimmer should begin to open out and punch the
feet toward the wall just prior to contact; this activates the hip exten-
sors and quadriceps and results in a shorter contact time, keeping the
swimmer from “sitting” on the wall. the feet should contact the wall
at approximately a 45-degree angle (figure 15.2d). having remained
behind the swimmer, the arms are fully extended into the streamlined
position for the explosive drive off the wall, which is accompanied by
an immediate fast, narrow butterfly kick (figure 15.2e).
a
b c
d e
Figure 15.2, a-e Sequence of action for the freestyle change of direction.
193

--- Page 208 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
Most swimmers whose feet exit too high above the water are keeping
the legs too straight. as a baby dolphin kick occurs, the knees must flex
immediately to help exit the feet. When the heels clear the surface of
the water, the legs must be bent.
Freestyle Change of Direction Drills
these are learning drills to be managed distinct from swimming sets, and
therefore should not be incorporated into other swimming sets. take time,
in the early phases of the season and periodically throughout the season,
to slow the practice down and do these drills as separate entities.
Arms at sides. this drill works on the approach to the wall by having
swimmers practice change of direction movements. Do this drill
the first few times five or six feet away from the wall such that no
contact is actually made with the wall; swimmers will turn when
they reach an imaginary wall. then, as swimmers progress, they can
do the drill close enough to the wall so that they are able to press
off the wall on the back.
Swimmers keep the head still and the arms stationary throughout
the drill. there must be no twisting from the stomach directly to the
back. this drill helps swimmers establish proper chin-tuck timing.
Most freestylers mistime when to tuck the chin during the change
of direction. Swimmers must tuck the chin to initiate the change of
direction at the moment of highest velocity in the pull cycle when
they are swimming. that moment during normal swimming is when
the lead hand is immediately under the hip. at that point, the chin
should be tucked forcefully into the chest. to have this occur at the
correct distance from the wall, swimmers
should use visual cues from the wall and
the end of the center line (the T) and prac-
tice commencing the turn from the same
place each time. By keeping the arm at
the side and under the hip throughout
this drill, swimmers can cue themselves
to begin the chin tuck.
One arm in front, heel slide. this drill
is similar to the one before it, but it
adds another component in which the
swimmers kick toward the imaginary
wall from a prone position with one
arm in front of the head. again, as
the swimmers progress, they can
194

--- Page 209 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
Table 15.2
Common Freestyle Change of Direction Errors
Error Negative result
legs split too wide apart Hips are too close to the wall when feet hit the wall
legs held together as they recover The body sinks as it carries water as legs clear the
over the surface of the water surface
Change of direction too far from Weak press off the wall
wall
Change of direction too close to Swimming farther than necessary (slower time)
wall
arching back as feet recover It takes the body, from the hips upward, out of hyper-
over the surface extended position; slows the change of direction
Twisting to the side Slows the change of direction (one can twist as one
leaves the wall)
Passing the wall Feet are placed deeper underwater than necessary.
This brings the hips closer to the wall and forces the
swimmer to push off upward and leave the wall too
shallow
Hand out of water during change The out-of-water hand cannot be used to down scull.
of direction Down sculling applies leverage and helps the legs get
over the surface quicker
Feet clearing the surface too high Upper body sinks
breathing into and out of change Slows the body velocity; going into the change of
direction direction, the swimmer takes eyes off the wall
actually move closer to the wall to kick one arm out, pull the arm
to the side, initiate the change of direction, and press off the wall
in the streamlined position. this drill works on the recovery of the
legs over the surface of the water with the knees bent. Swimmers
should work on punching the feet toward the wall such that they
are placed shallowly under the surface.
Tennessee drill #1. Swimmers drill proper change of direction me-
chanics without twisting off the wall. a fast, narrow kick starts
immediately as the feet leave the wall.
Tennessee drill #2. Swimmers push off the wall straight on the back
with balance as they twist to the side.
Standing flip. Swimmers practice flips starting from a standing position
195

--- Page 210 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
in the shallow end away from a wall. this drill will help swimmers
focus on their flip speed and coordination. it’s also fun!
Flag in and out. in this drill, swimmers charge hard and fast from the
flags into the wall, execute proper turn mechanics, and push off to
the flags. this drill emphasizes speed training and can be competi-
tive and fun.
Fin change of direction. Swimmers practice turns with fins on. the
fins help emphasize immediately tucking the knees as feet exit the
water.
Whole freestyle change of direction. this drill puts all elements of
the change of direction drills together into a complete, efficient flip
turn.
Freestyle Finish
the swimmer should attempt to finish at full recovery as the arm reaches
full extension. the arm is extended from the shoulder as the swimmer
completes the final stroke, finishing on the side with the head down,
driving for the wall and kicking hard (figure 15.3).
all freestyle finishes at practice should be executed with the swimmer
on his or her side, with the fingertips at the same depth as the shoulder.
the swimmer should ensure a strong kick into the wall and not lift
the head until the touch. When training, it can be more enjoyable and
stimulating for swimmers to execute perfect finishes or perfect changes
of direction while competing against a rival. if, on each finish or change
of direction in training, the swimmer imagines a rival swimming next
Figure 15.3 The freestyle finish.
196

--- Page 211 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
Table 15.3
Common Freestyle Finishing Errors
Error Negative result
Crossing center line of body Increased distance to the wall. The fastest way to the
wall is to extend the arm along the axis of the
shoulder. The shortest distance between two points
is a straight line.
Finish on stomach Potential reach is shortened and drag force higher on
the stomach as opposed to the side.
Weak finishing pull loss of power and velocity
Slowing kick before fingers loss of velocity
contact the wall
lifting head before fingers Increased drag and loss of velocity
contact the wall
to him or her and always beats that rival, the swimmer will be ready to
beat that rival in competition.
Butterfly Starts
essentially, the butterfly start is the same as for freestyle, except that
only a butterfly kick is used. it is important not to return to the surface
on too steep an angle, as this will slow forward speed (figure 15.4). the
swimmer should return at a shallow angle, commencing the arm stroke
just below the surface and breaking the surface on the second down-
beat of the kick, thus breaking the surface tension at the point of peak
power and taking the first stroke without breaking the rhythm of the
kick. Swimmers should not attempt to start the stroke too far below the
surface or they will find themselves trying to recover the arms while
still underwater.
Figure 15.4 The butterfly start.
197

--- Page 212 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
Butterfly Change of Direction
the goal is to reach the wall with the arms on a full recovery as they
reach full extension. as the hands contact the wall, the change of direc-
tion is initiated by slightly flexing the elbows and beginning to rotate
the body approximately 45 degrees while recovering the legs close to
the body to place the feet on the wall at approximately a 45-degree angle
(figure 15.5a). During this recovery of the legs, the elbow toward which
the body is rotating is drawn backward close to the torso, and the hand
drops toward the bottom of the pool with the little finger leading (figure
15.5b). the hand is rotated so that the palm faces upward as the hand
continues through an arc to finish pointing back along the lane. the pull
of this short arc coincides with the head being thrown back from the
wall as the swimmer inhales and assists the change of direction (figure
15.5c). the other arm leaves the wall and is recovered behind the ear
to join the lower hand and complete the streamlined position (figure
15.5d). the swimmer leaves the wall on the side with a strong push and
immediately begins a fast, narrow kick, rolling back into the flat position
and returning to the surface.
i advise swimmers to get in the habit of gauging how many strokes
it will take to get to the wall during change of direction practice. Only
through practice can they develop the judgment to anticipate whether
they will need to lengthen or shorten the last two strokes in order to
touch on a full recovery.
Tips for Butterfly Change of Direction
• Swimmers should flex the elbows minimally.
• Swimmers should snap the head back, away from the direction in
which they are swimming.
• Before the hands contact the wall, swimmers should begin to flex
the knees under the body.
• the first hand to leave the wall should extend toward the bottom
and then scull water upward to assist in the body rotation.
• Swimmers should “answer the telephone” with the last hand to
leave the wall, bringing the hand as close to the ear as possible.
this initiates the hyperextension off the wall.
Swimmers must drill the whole stroke butterfly change of direction.
they should start by keeping their heads as far away from the wall as
possible by flexing the elbows only minimally. have them execute a
minimum of four or five dolphin kicks off every change of direction in
competition and in practices. When butterflyers contact the wall the heels
198

--- Page 213 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
a
b c
d
Figure 15.5, a-d Sequence of action for the butterfly change of direction.
Table 15.4
Common Butterfly Change of Direction Errors
Error Negative result
bringing head too close to the wall Too much distance is swum
by bending the elbows
Pulling the body up/out of the water loss of time at the wall
Weak or minimal dolphin kicks loss of velocity
off the wall
breathing before the first stroke loss of velocity
after surfacing
199

--- Page 214 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
can immediately be seen kicking up, either out of the water or “boiling”
the water at the surface (in response to the heels being driven upward).
Obviously the feet are going in the wrong direction. they need to travel
under the body toward the wall. Swimmers must practice flexing the
knees under the body as the hands enter the water prior to contact with
the wall. this is especially difficult to master as it is contrary to every-
thing butterflyers have been taught with regard to kick timing during
the stroke.
Butterfly Finishes
as with the change of direction, the objective of a butterfly finish is to
touch both hands to the wall with the arms at full recovery. the same
practice swimmers use in the change of direction for gauging the dis-
tance to the wall and deciding whether to shorten or lengthen the last
two strokes will be useful here. if a swimmer misjudges the distance
and finds that he or she needs to take a half stroke to reach the wall—he
or she should not attempt to do so. trying to take a half stroke usually
ends with the swimmer touching the wall with either very bent arms,
or in the worst possible case, the face. it is better practice to remain
hyperextended and kick, not glide, to the wall.
Backstroke Starts
it is critical with the backstroke start for the swimmers to lift clear of the
water. if not, they will give their competitors at least a half-body length
advantage, often more.
the hands are placed wide apart of the start handles with the thumbs
over the top of the bar to allow a quick release. the feet are placed as high
as possible on the wall while remaining below the water line, slightly
apart to assist with a straight pushback. to “take your mark,” the body
is drawn up keeping the elbows out, not down, while the head is placed
forward (figure 15.6a).
at the start signal, the arms push back and are recovered out and
around to the streamlined position. recovery should be neither flat, nor
directly over the top of the head, but partway between (figure 15.6b).
the hips are driven up out of the water, and the head is quickly driven
backward until the back is arched and the feet are lifted or flicked clear
of the water. the fingertips should enter the water before the hips. the
swimmer should maintain the hyperextended position and immediately
begin strong, fast, dolphin kicks (figure 15.6c), holding a shallow angle
to return to the surface. the first stroke is taken so that the swimmer
200

--- Page 215 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
a
b
c
d
Figure 15.6, a-d Sequence of action for the backstroke start.
201

--- OCR from Page 215 Image 3 ---
Bp as eal EEE EES aa a
= ry =i be T= » ala +
ha

= th a a my

--- OCR from Page 215 Image 4 ---
— are

uk -

--- Page 216 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
breaks the surface during the final phase of the stroke, achieving peak
power to assist in breaking surface tension (figure 15.6d). remember that
starts should be practiced separately before the beginning of backstroke
sets so that emphasis can be placed purely on the starting technique.
Backstroke Change of Direction
the change of direction itself is essentially the same as the freestyle
change of direction. naturally enough, the biggest difference lies in ro-
tating from the supine (back) to the prone (front) position at the correct
point to initiate the change of direction. the other notable difference is
remaining on the back when pushing off from the wall.
the easiest and probably the most standard method of determining
when to start the change of direction is to count the number of strokes
it takes to reach the wall from the flags and subtract one. call this the
rotator stroke. as the hand exits the water on the rotator stroke, the
swimmer completes the stroke by continuing the arm over the opposite
shoulder (figure 15.7, a and b), thereby assisting the lateral rotation
from back to front and finishing at full extension. it is important that
the other arm, extended at the start of the rotator stroke, complete the
underwater pull to finish at the side, palm down, in preparation for the
vertical rotation at the wall (figure 15.7c). By commencing lateral rota-
tion at the correct point, the swimmer should now be in the right place
to initiate a freestyle change of direction (see page /bb/). On pushing off
from the wall the swimmer remains on the back, coming immediately
into a fast, strong butterfly kick to return to the surface, the same as dur-
ing the backstroke start.
Backstroke Change of Direction Drills
Table 15.5
Common Backstroke Change of Direction Errors
Error Negative result
looking over the shoulder for the wall Unnecessary; slows swimmer down
Change of direction too close to the wall Swimming farther than necessary; adds time
Flutter kicking off the wall Slower for 93% of swimmers in the country to
flutter kick instead of dolphin kick off the wall
leave the wall too shallow Surface tension increases drag. Swimmer must
be deep off the wall to dolphin kick effectively.
202

--- Page 217 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
a b c
Figure 15.7, a-c Initiating the backstroke change of direction.
Against the imaginary wall. the swimmer focuses on the actual change
of direction itself without concentrating on the wall.
With dolphin kicks. During this turn, the swimmer works on hitting
the feet high on the wall and drills fast, narrow dolphin kicks off
the wall.
Backstroke Finish
the correct technique for the backstroke finish requires the swimmer to
count the strokes from the flags to gauge his or her position relative to the
wall, just as in the change of direction. this time however, the swimmer
will use the full number of strokes. On completion of the last stroke, the
swimmer extends the shoulder to achieve maximum reach and drives
the head back, finishing partially on the side, kicking hard (figure 15.8).
a dolphin kick may be included in this final lunge to the wall.
Figure 15.8 The backstroke finish position.
203

--- Page 218 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
Breastroke Starts
the start dive will be the same as for freestyle and butterfly. however,
unlike the other strokes, there is no kicking on entry to the water. instead,
swimmers maintain the hyperextended streamlined position until they
feel the decline in speed (figure 15.9a), at which point they execute a
single butterfly pull with the hands finishing by the sides, then hold this
position again until they feel the decline in speed (figure 15.9, b and c).
as they feel this decline, the hands are recovered underneath the body,
close to the torso and continue through the full extension (figure 15.9, d
and e). Swimmers must be careful not to come to a complete stop prior to
the kick. the kick must carry swimmers toward the surface. Just below
the surface, swimmers execute the first arm pull, ensuring that the head
breaks the surface before reaching the widest part of the stroke. this
entire procedure is referred to as the breaststroke pullout and is used on
every start and at every change of direction in breaststroke events.
Breaststroke Change of Direction
from the touch at the wall on a full recovery to the drive off the wall, the
change of direction is the same for breaststroke as it is for butterfly, after
the drive, however, instead of a butterfly kick the swimmer exe-cutes
a breaststroke pullout. refer to butterfly change of direction, including
“tips,” for more information that is also relevant for breaststroke.
Breaststroke Finish
as with butterfly, the objective is to finish on a full recovery as the
arms reach full extension. remember, if in doubt as to whether to take
another stroke or not, swimmers should always kick and streamline
for the wall. they should never take an extra or partial stroke on the
finish.
Summary
• practice starts, turns, and finishes during practice to perfect them
204

--- Page 219 Text ---
Starts, Turns, and Finishes
a
b
c
d
e
Figure 15.9, a-e Sequence of action for the breaststroke start.
205

--- Page 220 Text ---
Trembley and Fielder
Table 15.6
Common Breaststroke Change of Direction Errors
Error Negative result
looking over the shoulder for the wall Unnecessary; slows swimmer down
Head too close to wall Swimming farther than is necessary
Heels flying up Heels extending out of the water after the
hands have contacted the wall indicate the feet
are not going in the proper direction. as with
butterfly, the feet need to be going toward the
wall when the hands contact the wall
Climbing out of the pool Spending too much time pulling up out of the
pool
for races.
• every practice start should be at maximum effort.
• Swimmers should learn to jump through the balls of the feet and
use their big toes.
• Swimmers must change direction in turning with minimal time at
the wall.
• the feet are carried over the water and contact the wall at a 45-de-
gree angle on freestyle and backstroke turns.
• Swimmers should streamline off the wall.
• the chin tuck must be a forceful movement into the chest on the
freestyle and backstroke turns.
• Swimmers should finish on a full recovery and full extension.
• the change of direction in butterfly and breaststroke is initiated by
slightly flexing the elbows.
• Swimmers should lift clear of the water in the backstroke start.
• Subtract one from the number of strokes it takes to reach the wall
from the backstroke flags. this final stroke is the rotator stroke into
the turn in backstroke.
• the body must not come to a complete stop prior to the kick in the
breaststroke start.
• Swimmers should never take an extra or partial stroke on the finish
in breaststroke or butterfly.
206

--- Page 221 Text ---
Part
v
Training
for Optimal
Performance

--- Page 223 Text ---
c h a p t e r s i x t e e n
Freestyle Sprint
Training
Michael Bottom

--- Page 224 Text ---
Bottom
if you study any great artist you will understand that he or she did not
rise above his or her contemporaries without help. each had mentors,
went to school, or studied the masters. the basic elements of their art-
istry—how to mix colors, their brush strokes, and even the way they
interpreted their artistic vision—were influenced by those greater than
themselves.
it has been my goal for over 20 years to learn from the masters of our
sport and to give to my athletes that which i did not have: a coach dedi-
cated to sprint swimming. i am dedicated to this end and have studied
and applied to the training of sprinters the coaching expertise of many
mentors including George haines, Mike troy, David salo, Doc counsil-
man, David Marsh, Mark schubert, Jim steen, nort thornton, and oth-
ers. i have learned much from their teachings, mistakes, and successes.
While i can’t possibly pass on to you all that i have learned from these
outstanding coaches in one brief chapter, i can give you a basic color
scheme for sprint training and my personal guidance on how to apply
the colors.
Using the modified United states swimming training categories (see
table 16.1) and a basic understanding of physiology, you can choose the
training session or phase that best suits the needs of the athletes in your
swim program. ernest W. Maglischo’s Swimming Even Faster (2001) is my
textbook, and references to the training topics i discuss in this chapter
Table 16.1
Training Phase Color Palette
Work:
Color Description Example set Pulse rate rest ratio
Platinum Speed 25s with band N/a > 1:2 to 1:8
Gold Speed/power 25s against band N/a > 1:8
Green lactate production 4  (50 + easy 25) Max 1:2 to 1:8
on 2:00
Purple lactate tolerance 4 dive 100s Max 1:2 to 1:8
·
Blue VO2max 20  200 w/ :20 rest 160 to 180 :20 sec rest; 1:1
Red Threshold 3  400 w/ :20 rest 140 to 170 :10 to :40 rest
Pink aerobic 1,000 pull 120 to 150 :10 to :30 rest
White Minimum aerobic 3  400 swim, kick, pull > 120 :10 to :30 rest
(warm-up)
210

--- Page 225 Text ---
Freestyle Sprint Training
can be found in more detail in the 755 pages of that book.
Base Training for Sprinters
the training colors of white (minimal aerobic work), pink (aerobic
·
training), and red (VO max workouts) can be seen throughout a well-
2
balanced training plan. however, the foundation of all swim training
must be technique. nort thornton, head swim coach at the University
of california at Berkeley, is a master of stroke technique. he has taught
me that technique is the base or foundation that all fast swimming is
built on. the most destructive thing, in my opinion, to fast swimming
is the notion that we must build an aerobic base as the foundation to
swimming. Miles and miles of indiscriminate swimming develops swim-
mers with survival stroke technique and shoulders that are often on the
verge of requiring surgery. the swimmers that do not quit mileage-based
programs are either genetically adapted for this type of training, indepen-
dent (viewed by coaches as rebellious) enough to protect themselves, or
destined to be limited in the long run by poor technique. thus, aerobic
swimming must be accompanied by technique instruction and must be
monitored diligently. ninety-nine percent of the endurance work that
my sprinters do in the water has a technique focus. the coach who is
truly an artist will apply the aerobic colors of red, pink, and white using
drills, games, toys, and dryland exercises.
aerobic fitness is developed over a longer period of time than other
types of fitness, but this area of training is the most accepting. non-
specific overall aerobic development can have more benefits to a sprint
swimmer than miles of freestyle swimming. to build aerobic fitness, we
do a circuit every tuesday afternoon that lasts from 40 to 60 minutes.
in one circuit Bart Kizierowski, 1999 ncaa champion in the 100-meter
freestyle, does the following:
• runs a quarter mile in under 1 minute
• Does 10 pull-ups
• runs six times up and down a basketball court dunking the basket-
ball at each end
• Does 24 plyometric jumps on a three-foot platform
• runs and dives into a 25-meter underwater sprint kick
• Does 275 meters of backstroke pulling on the lane line
• Grabs a kickboard and does a 31-second 50-meter kick
• swims 250 meters
then he is back to the run to begin another round. During the 45 min-
211

--- Page 226 Text ---
Bottom
utes it takes to do four rounds of the circuit, Bart’s pulse falls between
150 and 185 beats per minute. Bart does this circuit continuously in his
swimsuit. he slips his aqua jogging shoes on and off in seconds for the
jumping and running work.
Great sprinters such as Olympic medalist Gary hall Jr. and world-re-
cord holder anthony ervin dig their heels in at a straight freestyle swim
that is over 400 meters. the first time i saw Gary at practice in 1995, i
had been called in to help salvage his season, as he was no longer get-
ting along with his current coach. after hearing how Gary would not
do a hard stroke for a whole practice, his coached laughed and said i
had to see something. he took me over to the pool where Gary was in
the middle of a set of 300s. Of course, Gary was not making the interval
and so he was swimming straight through the rest periods. his coach
laughed and asked if i had seen Gary do one flip turn in the 20 minutes
that we had been standing there watching. i said i hadn’t, and he replied,
“see!” For the first time, i did see. at the next break i walked over to
Gary and complimented him on his brilliance. he didn’t believe that i
was serious, so i sat down on the pool deck and explained that i under-
stood his logic. i told him i understood that by doing open turns when
he was swimming in a crowed lane at slow speeds he was not develop-
ing habits and nerve pathways that would be hard to change when he
was ready to swim and turn fast. “Brilliant!” i repeated and then went
back to observing.
Gary began to trust me as the season progressed. at one point i asked
him if he felt we were doing enough aerobic yardage. he laughed and
said, “We start with one and a half hours of weights, then do 30 minutes
of stretching and core body work, then we get in and swim about 30 to
40 minutes of technique work, and finish up with about 15 minutes of
speed work. By the end of warm-down my heart rate has been over 120
for about 3 hours. that is just the morning workout! Yes, i think we are
doing enough aerobic yardage.” Gary ended that 1995 season with five
pan-pacific gold medals.
some of the greatest teachers i have had have been the athletes them-
selves. in the three seasons that i worked with four-time Olympic gold
medalist Jon Olsen, he changed his stroke technique each season. i gave
him the tools to work with, and he creatively learned to swim faster.
through our discussions and much experimentation on his part, he found
a better way each season. this brings home the point that technique is
the base that fast swimming is built on. the endurance colors of white,
pink, and red should be applied with technique.
the color blue that represents the training category above a person’s
212

--- Page 227 Text ---
Freestyle Sprint Training
·
VO max threshold is, in my opinion, nonproductive to sprinters. Long-
2
duration, short-rest, high-intensity sets quickly deplete the stored glyco-
gen in the muscles. Once atp (adenosine triphosphate) and cp (creatine
phosphate)—two high-energy compounds that fuel the muscles—are
used up within the first 15 seconds of anaerobic exercise, glycogen
stored in the muscles is the only energy source available to sustain fast
swimming. When muscle glycogen stores are low, aerobic metabolism
must be used to a greater extent. aerobic metabolism is a much slower
process and cannot produce the energy to continue fast swimming. in
addition, training in the blue zone also slows the anaerobic reaction that
breaks down glycogen into lactic acid. this is counterproductive to a
sprinter’s need to produce as much energy as quickly as possible.
Anaerobic Training for Sprinters
after graduation from Usc, i took an exercise physiology class at Uc
Berkeley. the professor, Dr. George Brooks, was a world expert on anaero-
bic metabolism and the removal of lactic acid from muscles. the class
defined and confirmed a truth that had been revealed to me two years
earlier, “if you want to swim fast, you have to train fast!” the academic
term for this simple truth is “the principle of specificity.”
Lactate-Tolerance Sets—Purple
the pain in sprinting comes when the athlete generates energy so fast
that the by-product of that energy production, lactic acid, cannot be
removed from the muscle cells fast enough. the muscle ph drops from
neutral (7.0) to a state of acidosis (6.5 to 6.8), and the muscle fibers go
on strike (stop contracting). this “piano-on-the-back” syndrome can be
best observed in my favorite race, the 100 butterfly. if you are at all a fan
of WWF wrestling, you will enjoy watching butterflyers go from the fluid
horizontal position to the vertical “Oh, no” position. the life-and-death
struggle begins for some about 10 yards out from the end of the race.
in my opinion, contrary to Us swimming’s national “speed though
endurance” campaign, the piano-on-the-back syndrome can be best
reduced by a steady diet of purple pain, or lactate-tolerance, sets fol-
lowed by white and pink levels of aerobic swimming. purple training
increases the muscle cells’ ability to buffer lactic acid and at the same
time increases the muscles’ ability to flush lactic acid out of the cells.
in addition, acidosis is fiber specific, which means that an athlete can
have an innervated muscle fiber bundle going into acidosis while two
doors down there is a fiber bundle kicking back watching reruns of the
213

--- Page 228 Text ---
Bottom
1996 100 fly at the Us trials and cheering on Byron Davis. During purple
sets an athlete learns the valuable lesson of adaptation. slight stroke
changes at the proper time can delay total paralysis by recruiting lazy
neighboring fiber bundles to help out. Finally, to some extent, the pain
of acidosis can be pushed back. During purple sets an athlete will learn
that purple pain can be conquered.
purple, or lactate-tolerance, sets are the most taxing on the athlete. i do
not recommend more than three purple sets per week, and i recommend
a full day of recovery following each set. My favorite purple set is 4 
(dive 25 meters underwater, 75 meters blast, 300 meters easy backstroke).
the goal of the set is that the athlete be unable to move his or her arms
as he or she passes under the final backstroke flags and must find a way
to get to the wall. The artistry is getting your athletes to give an all-out
effort to experience and deal with acidosis.
Lactate-Production Sets—Green
Lactate-production, or green, sets are the mainstay for the 50 swimmer.
these sets are designed to keep the athlete from going into acidosis. the
duration of each swim and the amount of rest between swims must keep
the swimmer from experiencing extreme muscle tie-up. there is nothing
more fun for a sprinter than to have the experience of swimming fast
without the severe pain of acidosis. at the beginning of the season when
we are doing our technique base, i use green sets to teach the freshmen
how to swim fast without fear.
When i took over the sprint program at cal Berkeley, the stroke of one
of the sophomores on the team caught my eye during the first practice.
he was able to enter his hand into the water and instantly hold water. i
drooled on myself when i watched him swim. the season progressed,
and this swimmer (call him Lance) showed great comeback speed. he
was always catching the field in the last 10 yards of the 100. it turned
out that this comeback speed, however, never quite overcame the ability
of many of his competitors to hang on and finish the race ahead of him.
When Lance swam the 50, he was able to get up and go! Yet his first 50
in his 100 lacked aggressiveness. Over and over i talked to him about
getting on the first 50 both in practice and at the meets, and over and
over in purple sets and at meets he came home strong. there is nothing
wrong with coming home strong, but if a sprinter does not go out to make
his or her mark in the first 50 of the 100, then coming home strong helps
as much as slapping spF 30 on the blistered skin of a sunburn. Fear of
the pain and embarrassment of dying in a race can cripple a sprinter.
there is nothing that teaches sprinters to hold back more than breaking
214

--- Page 229 Text ---
Freestyle Sprint Training
them in on purple sets. Let your sprinters learn to enjoy swimming fast
with minimal pain. start them out with green sets before you put them
into purple pain.
One of my favorite green sets is 3  ([3 x (75 + 25)] + 300 easy), de-
scending the 75s so that swimmers work on perfect stroke for the first
two and give the last one 100 percent. the 25s are done on the back
pulling on the lane line. the 300 after the finish of the third 75 + 25 is
directed drilling. the first round is done with no equipment, the second
round with fins, and the final round with fins and paddles. Julio santos,
the ecuadorian national champion in the 50 freestyle, once went under
28 seconds for his final 75 with fins and paddles on. there is no drug
available to a true sprinter that will get him or her higher than swimming
fast. Julio was a new man after that experience.
Yes, there are physiological benefits to green sets besides the endor-
phins released. When training this system there is an increase in the
amount of key enzymes stored in the muscle cell. these enzymes allow
the anaerobic breakdown of glycogen (glycolysis) to occur at an acceler-
ated rate; this, in turn, releases more energy for fast swimming.
Power Production Sets—Gold
it is one thing to have the strength to be able to lift mass in the weight
room. it is another thing to use that strength to swim fast. Gold, or
power-production, sets buy you a ticket to transport strength from the
weight room to the pool. the idea behind gold sets is to translate the
very nonspecific action of pushing a weight or other form of resistance
up and down to a very specific swimming stroke. this must be done
without ruining stroke technique. any device that increases resistance
or overloads the arms and legs can be used in improving power in the
water. in my opinion, all gold sets should be done with swimming toys
and machines to help increase resistance. here is a golden list of things
to play with in the water:
• Bands (surgical tubing)
• t-shirts, assorted clothing, and drag suits
• an assortment of hand paddles
• an assortment of fins
• the power rack
• the power reel
• Buckets
• parachutes
215

--- Page 230 Text ---
Bottom
• pull bags
• Lane line segments
• Medicine balls
• rowboats
• Weights
• innertubes
Your list can be as long as you are creative. have fun!
My two favorite pieces of equipment to use in assisting this process are
the power rack and the power reel, both developed by a company called
total performance. the athlete swims against a measured resistance for a
measured distance. the progress of the athlete can be measured in time
units, and the improvement in power can be charted.
From 1999 to 2000 Gary hall Jr. dramatically increased his muscle
mass. During this time, he almost doubled the weight he was able to lift
on the lat pulldown machine. his body weight went from about 180 to
219 pounds during this same year. i was concerned that this increase in
body mass would translate into increased resistance in the water and that
he might not have a sufficient increase in his ability to generate power to
compensate for the additional body resistance. My fears subsided when,
while swimming with fins and paddles against the maximum weight of
the power rack, he not only beat all the other Olympic sprinters in the
water by over a second but almost pulled the machine in as well.
Speed-Production Sets—Platinum
i’ve added this color to the palette of Us swimming. platinum (speed-
production) work differs from gold sets in that it allows the athletes to
feel their bodies, stroke technique, and stroke rate as they move through
the water at speeds that match their race velocity. Gold (power-pro-
duction) work tends to load the athlete and slow both stroke rate and
velocity. the secret to platinum training’s speed production is keeping
the set short and using some type of accelerator to get athletes moving
at their end-of-the-year racing speeds. the best device to help do this
is the power reel made by total performance; unfortunately this device
is very costly and is not readily available to most programs. almost as
good are the stretch bands made by several companies and fashioned
by innovative coaches out of surgical tubing. however, the key to speed
training is not the particular device moving the athlete but the feedback
the athlete receives from his or her own kinesthetic awareness and a
keen-eyed coach.
things feel different at high speeds. the exponential increase in the
216

--- Page 231 Text ---
Freestyle Sprint Training
resistance of the water allows athletes to feel their strokes in different
ways. this could be positive or negative depending on your eye and the
ability of your swimmer to accept and make changes. anthony ervin,
2000 ncaa champion in the 50 and the 100 freestyle and world-record
holder in the short course 50-meter freestyle, has an incredible kines-
thetic feel for his stroke at high speeds. We can discuss a stroke change,
and he can go in and alter his stroke with only one or two attempts.
Making the initial change, however, is only half the battle. his first
comment tends to be, “it doesn’t feel right!” he always gets the same
response from me: “so? You have been swimming with the same pattern
for 10 years; of course it doesn’t feel right to change it. the question is,
is it faster?” We then discuss if it is indeed faster. i usually avoid these
discussions by inserting my standard disclaimer: “i do not claim to have
the answer or to know which is faster. the only way we will be able to
tell is if you learn them both; then we can time them both to see which
is faster.” anthony is all about going faster and is quickly ready for the
test. We test our theories on the power reel. When the reel is set at a
specific speed, it pulls the swimmer at a constant rate. the stopwatch
quickly discerns the truth.
platinum sets should always be done at race speed and at race-stroke
rates. in 1999 Gordan Kozulj, 200 backstroke specialist, finished his
ncaa eligibility and was ready to try something different. he asked
me to train him as a sprinter. he had done miles of background work
and his technique was solid. as we analyzed his race it became clear
that there was one glaring difference between Gordan and the top back-
strokers in the world. his stroke rate was much slower. his rates were
between 29 and 37 cycles per minute. there was not one competitor in
the 1996 Olympic final whose rate at any point in the race fell below
37 cycles per minute. Most of the competitors held between 42 and 45
cycles per minute.
When we first started working on increasing his stroke rates, he com-
plained that it was too hard to maintain the higher rates. We used assisted
swimming for shorter distances to get him used to holding faster rates,
but for half the year he struggled to take his stroke rate to even 37 cycles
per minute. training at the phoenix swim club in phoenix, arizona,
gave us a unique opportunity to use a tow machine that pulled Gordan
up and down the 50-meter course. Using this device helped him learn to
hold his rates at 42 to 47 cycles per minute for 300 meters. Gordan won
the 2000 european championships, unrested, in his best time of 1:58.6,
and he held his rates from 42 to 47, just as we had practiced.
in 1992 i was working for David Marsh at auburn University, dream-
217

--- Page 232 Text ---
Bottom
ing of creating a sprint program. “David,” i said, “there are two things
that would change the face of swimming. the first is drug testing the
chinese women, and the second is moving this bulkhead to 15 meters
two times per week.” the new pool at auburn had just been finished, and
the bulkheads could easily be moved. David liked my line of thinking,
so he accommodated me with the bulkhead and gave me two swimmers
to use to try out my theories.
One of the athletes David allowed me to work with was a senior who
had had surgery during the summer to remove a growth on one of his
lungs. the doctors had removed one-half of the affected lung but had
gone out of their way not to cut the latissimus dorsi muscle so that he
could still swim. his name was Dean hutchinson. the other was another
senior who had never been on the conference team. his name was Bill
pilczuk.
Dean’s best was about 20.1 in the 50, and Bill’s was about 20.3. the
three of us, in addition to other individuals whom David would cycle
through the group, pioneered the speed group. We had many exciting
moments; each one exhilarated us and motivated us to keep the experi-
ment going. By the end of the year Dean and Bill went 19.4 and 19.7,
respectively, in the finals of the ncaa championships. Bill was the first
person in eight years to beat a guy by the name of alexander popov in
the 50-meter freestyle. eight years later both were still swimming and
both competed in the 2000 Us Olympic trials. i do not claim that the
speed training alone did the trick for them. Both Dean and Bill had had
three years of solid training under David Marsh; i only had to work on
their technique, power, and speed. to this day, as i continue to paint
in an unconventional style, i owe much to David for his support and
advice.
as a coach-artist, i judge my success by looking at each individual
piece of art, and i urge you to do the same. each athlete is in fact a work
of art in progress. if you gear programs to the masses you may develop
swimmers who produce—but you will not be a successful coach until
you can refine your techniques for each individual. each canvas can
reflect your work, and you can be proud of what you help create. if a
season passes and you are not satisfied with your work on a particular
canvas, maybe more red, white, or blue is needed; maybe more green,
purple, gold, or platinum will help in another instance. the exciting
thing is that you are the artist. there is no blame involved in creating;
the only consideration is the result. take responsibility for your artwork
and enjoy the process.
218

--- Page 233 Text ---
Freestyle Sprint Training
Summary
• technique is the base on which fast swimming is built.
• aerobic swimming must be accompanied by technique instruction
and must be carefully monitored.
• the artist-coach can apply aerobic training in nonspecific aerobic
work such as drills, games, and dryland exercises.
• nonspecific aerobic development can be more beneficial to the
sprint swimmer than miles of swimming.
·
• training sprinters above their VO2max threshold is not productive;
limited anaerobic tolerance training is critical.
• if you want to swim fast, you have to train fast.
• Lactate-production sets are the mainstay of the 50 sprinter.
• power-production sets permit the transfer of dryland strength train-
ing to the water.
• speed work provides valuable feedback and awareness to the athlete.
it should be done for short distances at race speed and at race-stroke
rates.
• each athlete is a work in progress, and the coach is continually cre-
ating the right blend of training colors to achieve the best results.
219

--- Page 235 Text ---
c h a p t e r s e v e n t e e n
Freestyle Middle-
Distance Training
Doug Frost

--- Page 236 Text ---
Frost
It is not a coach’s intention, nor should it be, to specialize in coaching
any particular event or distance. Doing so can jeopardize the balance
and effectiveness of a swim program. however, it is quite obvious that
several very successful coaches tend to produce regularly in certain
specialties. success breeds success as the saying goes, and this applies
very much to swim coaching. having an athlete perform well at the in-
ternational level in a particular event has a twofold effect on a program:
other team members aspire to match that performance, and there is a
natural tendency for the coach to emphasize that event when setting up
the training structure. Being successful in coaching a specific distance
also tends to attract swimmers from other programs. While I believe that
all coaches should be in a position to provide opportunities for their
swimmers to excel in all events and distances, I realize that this is not
always practical or possible. Given the available pool space, time, and
funding, programs are often required to be more generalized, much larger,
and less workable for coaches than might be considered ideal.
I worked in such a situation from 1979 until 1995 at the padstow swim
centre in metropolitan sydney, australia, using a five-lane, 25-meter pool
(which I still lease and have operated for the last 20 years). the most
successful athlete to emerge during those years was philip Bryant, 1992
Olympian, world championship finalist, and commonwealth Games
medalist in the 400 individual medley. I am very proud of his success,
considering the training environment we had to contend with. During
all the fuss over philip, there was another young star in the melting pot,
Ian thorpe. I started to sing Ian’s praises in 1995, when he was a young
12-year-old doing fantastic things in the training pool. You might ask,
“Who gets excited about 12-year-old age groupers?” I do, particularly if
his name is the “thorpedo.”
since 1995 there have been five years of growth and development for
that young man as well as my club program. For about two years, I used
both the padstow Indoor centre and the sydney International aquatic
centre—home of the 2000 Olympics. With the two pools, I was able to
combine long-course and short-course training, doing five long-course
and five short-course sessions per week. Weary of the increased travel,
in October 1997 I took up the position of elite coach at the well-ap-
pointed sutherland Leisure centre, operated by the sutherland shire
council, where I am responsible for the overall program and directly
responsible for the national squad. Because of the facilities available at
the sutherland, I am now able to conduct both long-course and short-
course training.
Of course everybody wants to coach somebody who is extremely tal-
ented, but if you just wait for that talented youngster to appear on your
222

--- Page 237 Text ---
Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
doorstep, it will never happen. Develop an en-
vironment that will provide the opportunity
for that to occur. One way to develop such
an environment is to support and instruct
your athletes in all areas of development,
not just directing what they do at the pool.
this includes addressing the way they
conduct themselves away from the pool,
their education, their diet, and their per-
sonal hygiene, as well as providing sport
science support in the form of sports
medicine, sport psychology, and mas-
sage. advise them of all the advantages
associated with swimming: the healthy
lifestyle, friends with a common inter-
est, travel, and so on. remember that
the harder you try, the luckier you will get. this is how
I went about setting up my practice area and developing my program in
middle-distance freestyle so that I could get lucky.
What Is Middle-Distance Training?
Middle-distance events have the characteristics of sprint (100 freestyle)
and distance (1,500 freestyle) events combined, in that they require the
athlete to maintain both speed and endurance. Good middle-distance
swimmers do not come about solely because of their physical attributes;
the best and most successful middle-distance performances are a func-
tion of both physical ability and a proper training program. I believe
that the success I have had with middle-distance swimmers is due in
part to helping them develop an efficient stroke that incorporates their
best technique traits.
there are two main middle-distance events:
• 400-meter freestyle. I consider the 400-meter freestyle (or the 500-
yard freestyle short course) to be the event most aligned with the
middle-distance classification; the 400-meter individual medley
has very similar characteristics.
• 200-meter freestyle. training for the 200-meter freestyle can be
incorporated into the middle-distance area. I have found that
swimmers moving down in distance tend to have more endurance
and thus have a distinct advantage over competitors moving up in
distance.
223

--- Page 238 Text ---
Frost
Both middle-distance freestyle events are similar to the 100 and
1,500 events in terms of the areas to address in training. For this reason
middle-distance training session preparation is not restricted to any one
area. If an area is neglected in your initial program structure, then the
preparation and final outcome will suffer.
to be successful in any event on the competition calendar, an athlete
must be prepared and have specifically trained for that event and dis-
tance. specialized and personalized preparation for each athlete is most
important; training requirements must be addressed individually.
It is important to remember when preparing workouts that not all
athletes can cope with the same workload. It is your responsibility as
coach to assess the athletes’ strengths and weaknesses and to incorpo-
rate changes in the training structure that will sharpen their particular
strengths and help them improve upon their weaknesses.
Once you have assessed swimmers’ individual needs, you can group
athletes of like ability on a team. having a middle-distance group as part
of the overall program can help the other swimmers do the following:
• Develop good work ethics
• Improve aerobic qualities
• Identify different events that they might swim
• enjoy variety in practices and within the program
not all teams provide the opportunity for swimmers to develop as
middle-distance specialists; in many cases athletes end up in the distance
or middle-distance lanes as a last resort; that is, a coach just doesn’t
know where else to put them. as a result, many coaches fail in their
responsibilities to develop the middle-distance potential of those they
are coaching. these coaches miss out on the chance to develop an area
of their program that could be very successful if they would only put in
the time and effort required to nurture middle-distance athletes.
I believe there are several reasons for the many gains made by our
middle-distance program including the testing procedure we use, the
suitable workout time and space we allow, and the consideration we give
to each group’s training needs when preparing the workouts.
the test sets are designed to identify prospective middle-distance
athletes. In addition to being capable of enduring an increased workload,
such athletes excel in doing the following:
• repeating even pace sets in a workout
• Maintaining a high floatation position in the water
• Using a balanced stroke—right is as strong as left
• Using an effective stroke for middle distance (optimal speed paired
224

--- Page 239 Text ---
Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
with endurance)
• Using a more powerful than average kick
the tests include the following:
1. 3,000-meter freestyle timed test. this test is the right length to give
the coach a basis for setting interval training sets and determining
the pace and intensity required for the particular session.
2. 5  200 on 5:00 freestyle test set, at the fastest possible speed,
holding even pace throughout the set. record time, heart rate, and
stroke count, and measure lactates using a specific lactate moni-
tor.
3. 6  100 on 6:00 freestyle maximum effort. again, record time,
heart rate, stroke count, and lactates.
4. 4  (50 dive timed + 450 active rest)
5. 8  ([4  100 in 1:15] on 6:00)
6. 200/400 freestyle kick. Goal is sub 3:00/6:00.
each of the first four tests should be conducted every four weeks. For
example, in week one test the 3,000 freestyle, week two the 5  200 on
5:00, week three the 6  100 on 6:00, and week four the 4  (1  50
sprint + 450 active rest). the 8  ([4  100 in 1:15] on 6:00) and 200/400
kick tests are conducted on a more regular basis.
Designing the Middle-Distance Program
to create an exciting and challenging program for each session, I devote
several hours prior to the start of each week to preparing for the coming
week. It is imperative that workouts be adjusted on a week-to-week ba-
sis. Doing so allows coaches the latitude to take into account individual
training responses to specific sets and the differences in adjusting to the
training demands. the final form of the training program will be gov-
erned by each athlete’s progress and should be based on the coach’s past
experiences, involving many years of testing responses and observing
athletes of all levels.
part of my workout preparation time is spent expanding my knowledge
by seeking out the expertise and advice of other coaches. I’ve consulted
experts such as Les Lazarus, terry Gathercole, Bill sweetenham, John
carew, Laurie Lawrence, the late Joe King, Ken Wood, and Don talbot.
My contact and involvement with these coaches and their athletes at
national event camps and on national teams has provided me with a
wealth of knowledge. I find it helpful to apply their expertise and insights
225

--- Page 240 Text ---
Table 17.1a Frost
Overall Plan
Weeks Training phase
Date to Competition Testing Mid-distance Free
Free Breast comp free 21 day 10
day sprint
17-18 Jan World Cup Sydney Maintenance
Maintenance
19-21 Jan NSW Open
24 Jan 16 No test build build build build
31 Jan 15 aerobic aerobic aerobic aerobic
07 Feb 14 altitude TbC aerobic aerobic aerobic aerobic
14 Feb 13 altitude TbC 3,000 aerobic aerobic endurance endurance
21 Feb 12 altitude TbC 5  200 (5) aerobic aerobic endurance endurance
28 Feb 11 6  100 (6) adaptation aerobic Quality Quality
06 Mar 10 4  50 + 450 ar endurance adaptation Quality Quality
13 Mar 9 World S/C 3,000 endurance endurance aerobic aerobic
20 Mar 8 5  200 (5) endurance endurance aerobic aerobic
27 Mar 7 6  100 (6) adaptation endurance endurance endurance
03 apr 6 4  50 + 450 ar Quality adaptation endurance endurance
10 apr 5 aust age S/C 3,000 Quality Quality Quality Quality
17 apr 4 5  200 (5) Quality Quality Quality Quality
24 apr 3 6  100 (6) Precomp Quality Precomp Precomp
01 May 2 NSWIS Camp 4  50 + 450 ar Precomp Precomp Precomp Precomp
08 May 1 NSWIS Camp Precomp Precomp Precomp Precomp
13-20 May Olympic trials Sydney
15 May build build build build
22 May TbC Orientation camp Timed 3000 build build
29 May 16 5  200 (5) aerobic aerobic
05 Jun 15 6  100 (6) aerobic aerobic
12 Jun 14 altitude TbC 4  50 + 450 ar aerobic aerobic aerobic
19 Jun 13 altitude TbC Timed 3,000 aerobic aerobic endurance endurance
26 Jun 12 altitude TbC 5  200 (5) aerobic aerobic endurance endurance
03 Jul 11 6  100 (6) adaptation aerobic Quality Quality
10 Jul 10 4  50 + 450 ar endurance adaptation Quality Quality
17 Jul 9 Timed 3000 endurance endurance aerobic aerobic
24 Jul 8 5  200 (5) endurance endurance aerobic aerobic
31 Jul 7 NSW Open S/C 6  100 (6) adaptation endurance endurance endurance
07 aug 6 4  50 + 450 ar Quality adaptation endurance endurance
14 aug 5 Timed 3000 Quality Quality Quality Quality
21 aug 4 5  200 (5) Quality Quality Quality Quality
28 aug 3 NSW age S/C 6  100 (6) Precomp Quality Precomp Precomp
04 Sep 2 Olympic TC 4  50 + 450 ar Precomp Precomp Precomp Precomp
11 Sep 1 Olympic TC Precomp Precomp Precomp Precomp
16 Sep-1 Oct Olympic Games Sydney
Table 17.1b
226

--- Page 241 Text ---
Weekly TrainFrienegst yCley cMliedsdl ef-oDris ta n c e T r a in in g Mid-
dle-Distance and Distance Freestyle
Weeks 1 to 3—Aerobic Week 1—50 to 60 Week 2—60 to 70 Week 3—70 to 80
Day am pm
Monday aerobic a2 lactate tolerance
300 to 500s free Descend set 30  100 free or IM
Drag suit set 2 to 30  100 form
Sprint 400 total Kick free, IM, breast
Kick 2,000 free
Tuesday aerobic a1, anaerobic threshold
Overdistance free 3 to 6  1,000/1,500 100s short rest set
Include drills 2,000 to 3,000 fly set
8  swim ins Kick back
Kick fly Time trial
band fast stroke rate 50s
Wednesday Off aerobic a2
3,000 to 5,000 m as 400s free, 200s form
Slow/fast swim
Kick 2000 free
Thursday aerobic a1 anaerobic threshold
Overdistance pull/drag 6 to 12  500 50s short rest set
Include drills 2,000 to 3,000 m fly set
8  swim ins Kick back
Kick fly band fast stroke rate 50s
Friday aerobic a2 anaerobic threshold
Overdistance free Descend to threshold
Drag suit set Slow-fast swim
IM-breast set Time trial/club
Sprint 400 total
Kick 2,000 free
Saturday aerobic a1 Off
500, 800, 1,500s
200, 300, 400s
Fly set
Kick vertical
band fast stroke rate 50s
Sunday Off Off
Sample 3,000 timed
test sets 5  200 (5)
6  100 (6)
4  50 + 450 ar
227

--- Page 242 Text ---
Table 17.1b, continued Frost
Week 4—Adaptation (same as Week 12)
Weeks 5 to 7—Endurance Week 5—60 to 70 Week 6—70 to 80 Week 7—80 to 90
Day am pm
Monday aerobic a2 Heart rate lactate tolerance
300s fly set example 10  200 (4)
Slow-fast swim Kick free, IM, breast
Kick free
example 10  200 (4)
Tuesday aerobic a1 anaerobic threshold
Sprint 400 total 300s short rest
Overdistance pull/drag 2,000 to 4,000 m
2 to 4  1500 8  swim ins
Kick 2,000 free/fly Kick back
band fast stroke rate 50s
Wednesday Off aerobic a2
400s free-IM
Fly set
Slow-fast swim
Kick free
Time trial
Thursday aerobic a1 anaerobic threshold
Sprint 400 total 100 to 150s short rest
Overdistance pull/drag 4 to 8  800 2,000 to 4,000 m
Kick 2,000 free/back 8  swim ins
Kick fly
band fast stroke rate 50s
Friday anaerobic threshold aerobic a1
200s Fly set
Slow-fast swim Drills
Pull/drag 400 kick timed
Kick vertical Time trial/club
Saturday lactate tolerance Off
Free 30  50 (60) or
IM 28  50 (60) (7 each stroke)
Kick free, IM, breast
band fast stroke rate 50s
Sunday Off Off
Sample 3,000 timed Drag suit sets (each session)
test sets 5  200 (5)
6  100 (6)
4  50 + 450 ar
228

--- Page 243 Text ---
Table 17.1b, conFtrieneusetdyle Middle-Distance Training
Week 8—Adaptation (same Week 12)
Weeks 9 to 11—Quality Week 9—50 to 60 Week 10—60 to 70 Week 11—80 to 90
Day am pm
Monday aerobic a2 Heart rate lactate tolerance
Overdistance set example 100s or 200s
Fly set Kick free, IM, breast
Sprint 400 total
Kick 2,000 free
Tuesday aerobic a1 anaerobic threshold
1,000 to 1,500s Up to 300s short rest (for max total of 3,000)
Slow-fast swim Time trial or broken swim
Drills Kick back
8  swim ins 4 to 8  50 for pace
Kick fly band fast stroke rate 25s
·
Wednesday Off VO2max/lactate threshold
Inform swimmers of pm set example: 10 to 15  400 free
4-(5:00) 30 beats below max
3-(6:00) 20 beats below max
2-(7:00) 10 beats below max
1-broken maximum
Kick 200 own stroke
Thursday aerobic a1 anaerobic threshold
500 to 800s Up to 300s short rest (maximum total 3,000)
Slow-fast swim Time trial or broken swim
Drills Kick back
8  swim ins 4 to 8  50 for pace
Kick fly band fast stroke rate 25s
Friday aerobic a2 anaerobic threshold
Overdistance set Descend to threshold
Fly set 400s free or 200s form
Sprint 400 total Kick free/IM, breast
Kick 2,000 free Time trial/club
Saturday lactate tolerance Note am
example lactate tolerance set
20  50 (90) free Increase rest and decrease number each week.
20  50 (90) IM
band fast stroke rate 25s
Kick free/IM, breast
Sunday Off Off
Sample 3,000 timed Drag-suit sets (each session)
test sets 5  200 (5) Fast stroke rate (3  per week)
6  100 (6)
4  50 + 450 ar
229

--- Page 244 Text ---
Table 17.1b, continued Frost
Weeks 12 to 15*—Precompetition Week 12—50/70 Week 13—40/50 Week 14—
30/30 *Start 21 or 10 days out from competition
Day am pm
Monday aerobic + speed Heart rate lactate tolerance
Pull set/drills 100s descend to pace
Kick quality 50s Practice turns
4 to 8  50 for pace Jump turns
Practice push offs
Tuesday Off aerobic a2
Straight swim
Race-specific broken swims
Note projected times for pm practice: 100 m best time - 3 sec
200 m best time - 6 sec
400 m best time - 9 sec
Practice starts
Kick 400s 1 or 2
Wednesday aerobic + speed aerobic + speed
Pull set/drills Pull set/drills
Kick quality Kick quality
10 days out—race rehearsal 10 days out—race rehearsal
• Warm-up • Warm-up
• Heat swim • Final swim
• Swim-down • Swim-down
Thursday Off aerobic a2
150s or 75s
Race-specific broken swims
Practice starts
Kick 200s
Friday aerobic + speed aerobic a2
Pull set/drills 4 to 10  race distance
Kick quality 50s Descend to 30 bbm
4 to 8  50 for pace Race-specific broken swim
Practice push offs Practice turns
Jump turns
Vertical kick
Saturday Heart rate lactate tolerance 50s Off
Kick 100s
Practice starts
Sunday aerobic a2 Off
Race-specific broken swim
Prerace warm-up
Practice later in morning
230

--- Page 245 Text ---
Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
to my own training program.
I prepare my program and workouts using an overall plan that breaks
into four three- to four-week phases. table 17.1a shows the basic struc-
ture of this overall plan including the big-picture layout of the competi-
tions and the testing sets leading to the goal performance. table 17.1b
provides more details on how we structure the individual workout for
a 16-week cycle.
Being innovative is an important part of designing any program. a
change is as good as a holiday. It is possible to alter the workouts slightly
to keep swimmers challenged and excited without losing the desired
effect of a given session.
For example, Bill sweetenham recommends using a different warm-
up at every workout. I incorporate a new warm-up into each session,
always preparing swimmers for the change and keeping in mind the
warm-up’s relationship to the main set. change the focus regularly on
the kick and pull sets with overdistance and short rest repeat sets on a
structured basis, depending on the training stimulus required for that
session. Don’t be afraid to include extra kick in the workout. I include
2,000-meter sets twice per week in addition to the kick sets at every
other session.
to provide training variety, I also have several alternative dryland
programs in place. For example, swimmers might alternate between
running, skipping, circuit training, boxing, or stretch-cord workouts on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and vary the types of medicine ball
exercises they do on tuesdays, thursdays, and Fridays.
another way to keep the program fresh is to incorporate different train-
ing equipment. On our squad, all members must provide the following
training equipment for their personal use:
• Mesh bag
• Kickboard
• paddles, two sizes: finger paddles and large paddles
• pull buoy
• Drag suit
• Leg tie (band)
• Fins
the program supplies the swim harness and dive gauge. the important
thing to remember with accessories is to use them to your advantage, not
just for the sake of using them. Our middle-distance swimmers use drag
suits for both swim and kick sets, and pull buoys and bands for pull sets.
they do kicking sets with and without a board, and they use the fins for
231

--- Page 246 Text ---
Frost
swim kick and drill sets as well as speed sets and swim recovery. the
swim harness is useful for resistance and speed assistance, and the dive
gauge helps swimmers improve their distance off the wall.
Training Camps for Mid-
dle-Distance Swimmers
I have been involved with training camps at all levels over the past 20
years and have found that training in this environment has advantages
and disadvantages. On the plus side, a well-planned, well-run camp
may offer the following benefits:
• the added training stimulus that comes from a change in venue
• Improved climatic conditions
• Different training partners
• suitable accommodations close to the training venue
• correct and controlled meals
• support staff (medical, massage, biomechanical)
On the other hand, training camps may have the following draw-
backs:
• restricted lane space and training times
• poor timing (in relation to when swimmers need the type of training
provided)
• Unprepared athletes
• accommodations that are unsuitable or too far from the training
venue
• Meals that are improperly planned or served at inappropriate
times
there are several factors to consider prior to preparing for a camp, be
it at the club, state, or national level. the purpose of the camp is para-
mount. providing for middle-distance swimmers was our chief impetus
in organizing the first national event camp for Middle-Distance Free-
style at the thredbo alpine training center in October 1998. earlier that
year I had spoken with australian national coach Don talbot regarding
setting up an australian national event program for 200-meter to 400-
meter freestylers; we agreed that at previous camps, these athletes had
not received the same degree of specialized training as the other freestyle
groups. Introducing a middle-distance freestyle camp enabled us to
• identify athletes specializing in this area,
232

--- Page 247 Text ---
Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
• give recognition to middle-distance events,
• further develop the skills of these swimmers in a common arena,
• develop the knowledge of the coaches involved, and
Table 17.2
Camp Schedule
Date Morning Afternoon Evening
Sunday, Travel 11:30-2:30pm lunch 6:00-8:00pm Dinner
25 Oct. arrive at Training Centre 7:30pm Meeting room—
Room allocation team meeting
4:00-6:00pm Pool training (outline weekly program)
aerobic a1 Coaches meeting
Overdistance set (discuss training programs
Skills session and workouts)
Work on pushoffs
50s include turns at start
and finish
Monday, 7:00-9:00am Pool training 12:30-1:30pm lunch 6:00-7:00pm Dinner
26 Oct. aerobic a2 Gym TbC 7:30-9:30pm Meeting room—
Overdistance pull set 4:00-6:00pm Pool training stroke analysis
·
8  500 (6:30/7:00) VO2max
2 swim, 4 pull, 2 swim 3000 timed test
Short rest kick set aerobic a1 drill-kick-swim
3  (200, 150, 100, 50) 10  (150 drill, 100 kick, 50
(3:40, 2:15, 1:50, 1:00) swim). 3 free, 1 form, 2 free,
Sprint 400 total 1 form, 1 free, 2 form or IM
9:00-10:00am breakfast
10:00-12:00 Pool
underwater video
Tuesday, 7:00-9:00am Pool training 12:30-1:30pm lunch 6:00-7:00pm Dinner
27 Oct. aerobic a1 4:00-6:00pm Pool training 7:30-9:30pm Meeting room—
Recovery skills and drills anaerobic threshold stroke analysis
8  800 drills (right arm, Spiked 400 quality kick
alternate arms, freestyle 400 kick timed test
form, left arm, catch up) Challenge 100s
aerobic pull set Do as many 100s as you can
8  swim ins with a reduced takeoff time
9:00-10:00am breakfast
10:00-12:00 Pool
underwater video
Wednesday, 7:00-9:00am Pool training 12:30-1:30pm lunch 6:00-7:00pm Dinner
28 Oct. aerobic a2 (pre-packed lunch TbC) 7:30-9:30pm Movie
Swim mixed or race distance activity planned:
1  800 pull “To the summit” chair
8  50 kick lift and walk TbC
2  400 pull No pool workout
4  100 kick
4  200 pull
2  200 kick
8  100 pull
1  400 kick
Spiked 400 variable
Kick-drill
9:00-10:00am breakfast
(continued)
233

--- Page 248 Text ---
Frost
Table 17.2 continued
Date Morning Afternoon Evening
Thursday, 7:00-9:00am Pool training 12:30-1:30pm lunch 6:00-7:00pm Dinner
29 Oct. aerobic a1 4:00-6:00pm Pool training 7:30-9:30pm Meeting room—
Pull set race distance anaerobic threshold Starts and turns analysis
4  400, 1 swim, 3 pull Threshold 150s
3  400, 1 swim, 2 pull 20  150s
2  400, 1 swim, 1 pull 4-2:00, 3-1:55, 2-1:50, 1-1:45,
1  400, 1 swim 4-2:00, 3-1:50, 2-1:40, 1-1:35
Overdistance kick set Spiked 400
8  swim ins Quality kick set
9:00-10:00am breakfast 2  200 pull-band timed test
10:00-12:00 noon Pool starts
and turns video session
Friday, 7:00-9:00am Pool training 12:30-1:30pm lunch 6:00-7:00pm Dinner
30 Oct. aerobic a2 Gym session TbC 7:30-9:30pm Meeting room—
Overdistance pull set 4:00-6:00pm Pool training Starts and turns analysis
5  800 aerobic a1
Short rest vertical kick set
Race distance swim
Sprint 400 total 5  (300[4:00]100[1:30])
9:00-10:00am breakfast 300-400 pace + 20
10:00-12:00 noon Pool 100-400 pace + 5
starts and turns video 10  200 build
Kick set drills
20  50 kick (3 moderate [:50],
1 firm [:60])
Saturday, 7:00-9:00am Pool training lunch Dinner
31 Oct. 50s quality
5  12 50s 1 moderate,
1 hard, 2 moderate, 2 hard,
3 moderate, 3 hard [:60]
aerobic a1 swim-kick
9:00-10:00am breakfast
Depart
* The workouts listed do not include warm-ups, or all kick or pull sets. *
Total sessions = 11; total distance for the week 11  7,000 m average
• increase the depth of talent and improve the standard in the middle-
distance area.
table 17.2 shows how we set up the first middle-distance special-
ist camp and includes the daily activities, training, and main sets we
used.
Preparing for National
and International Competition
preparing an athlete for his or her first national competition can be a
234

--- Page 249 Text ---
Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
very difficult undertaking for the coach and the developing athlete. It
does help if you have other athletes in your squad who are competing
at the national level. these athletes can do much to assist the younger
athletes in the transition from age-group to national-level swimming
just by training with them.
Introduce national competition to a swimmer by setting up specific,
realistic challenges that the swimmer can focus on. For example, swim-
mers might work on bettering their entry time, improving their ranking,
or qualifying for the a or B final (semifinal). such goals help a swimmer
progress, step by step, rather than being overwhelmed.
the greatest satisfaction possible for a coach is having a swimmer
selected for a national team. this can lead to several exciting develop-
ments. Being selected means the swimmer has passed a major hurdle
in reaching his or her potential. the swimmer is now a member of a
team that will represent the country, and the sky is the limit. this ac-
complishment opens the door to winning a medal at the Olympics. In
my experience a swimmer who makes the national team (especially the
australian national team) has a very good chance of being successful
in the international arena because of the high level of ability and high
standards expected of members of the national team. Furthermore, the
prospect of being selected as a coach of the team, depending on your
swimmer’s rank and the total number of coaches required, is a distinct
possibility. I waited a long time to achieve my first ambition as a coach;
it was not my last, and I have not been disappointed. each achievement
has been a fantastic, challenging, and rewarding experience.
I include this segment so that all coaches will understand the impor-
tance of setting their own goals rather than just having their athletes set
goals. achieving the highest level possible requires that you place no
limits on yourself or your athletes. On numerous occasions I have come
into contact with coaches who do not project themselves or their athletes
as being able to compete at the national level; these coaches and athletes
are limited by such lack of vision. setting limits on what you believe
can be achieved will affect the results of your program in the short term
and the long term. If you believe an athlete can compete at the highest
level and you are not ready or able to take him or her there, then move
the athlete to a program that can do what it takes.
Maintaining the Focus of Your Program
an important step for a coach to take is to reflect on each season’s re-
sults for every athlete in order to establish the best direction to take in
the future to produce better results. I assess the attitude as well as the
235

--- Page 250 Text ---
Frost
performance of my athletes, taking into consideration the answers to
the following questions:
• What was their previous year’s performance?
• What makes them committed?
• Did they achieve their goals?
• Is their attendance consistent?
• are they enjoying the sport?
• are they managing their swimming and education commitments?
I also assess my own coaching performance over the past season by
determining the answers to these questions:
• have I been well prepared?
• can I improve my performance?
• What is my overall assessment of the season’s results?
• Did I achieve my goals?
Building in time to reflect on the past season highlights the highs and
lows, and provides the means to prevent similar lows in the future.
In closing, it is vital that I stress the importance of continuing profes-
sional development; no coach is an island. I have learned a great deal over
the last 10 years by attending training camps (hawaii, asca scholarship
coach); working with elite and senior athletes; working with legendary
and respected coaches; attending conferences, team camps, and work-
shops; making presentations; mixing with international coaches; and
using outside resources such as the nsWIs sport scientists.
Without the input and assistance of my peers as well as the cooperation
and support of the australian swimming coaches and teachers associa-
tion, australian swimming Inc., and the new south Wales Institute of
sport, my level of knowledge would be very shallow. the contributions
of these individuals and organizations have gone a long way in advanc-
ing me to the level of coaching I enjoy today.
Summary
• Failure is a natural consequence of trying. successful people aren’t
afraid to fail.
• Middle-distance freestyle pertains primarily to the 200- and 400-
meter events (200- to 500-yard events for short course).
236

--- Page 251 Text ---
Freestyle Middle-Distance Training
• having a middle-distance group in a training program helps develop
good work ethics, improve aerobic qualities, identify different kinds
of talent, and add variety to the program.
• Design a long-range program but evaluate and adjust workouts on
a week-to-week basis.
• continue to expand your knowledge.
• Warm-ups should be specific to the training goals of that session.
• Dryland training adds worthwhile variety to the program.
237

--- Page 253 Text ---
c h a p t e r e i g h t e e n
Freestyle
Distance Training
Dick Jochums

--- Page 254 Text ---
Jochums
My coaching philosophy has evolved over more than 20 years and is re-
flected in the Santa clara Swim club distance freestyle program that i’ve
developed and that i detail in this chapter. this philosophy was shaped
by my parents and by the many fine coaches who have influenced me.
My parents raised me to believe that i could be anything i wanted to
be if i worked hard enough. i still believe that this opportunity is what
america offers to all its citizens. i learned swimming from the best female
coach who has ever coached swimming, Lauralbelle Bookstauver. She
was a great advocate of developing proper technique in slow and fast
swimming. i swam at the University of Washington, three seasons for
Jack torney and one year for John tallman. coach torney taught me the
importance of being a gentleman, and coach tallman taught me the real
meaning of work (fast swimming) and that the future of swimming was
tied to science. coach tallman and i didn’t have a great swimmer-coach
relationship, but after making me beg for a job, he greatly influenced my
understanding of proper workout format and its relationship to swim
meet results. ninety percent of what has become my distance freestyle
program is directly related to the two years i spent with coach tallman
as his assistant coach.
i went to Berkeley for graduate work and had a great year helping pete
cutino, the very best pure coach in terms of quality of workouts and
communication with swimmers and staff that i have ever worked for.
anyone who thinks i’m a hard-ass should have seen me before he got
hold of me. (While many outsiders may think i am to be feared, those
who swim for me know better.) together, pete and i started and ran the
concord Swim club until i took a job in Long Beach, california, under
the direction of Don gambril. at this point in my career i thought i knew
it all. i had developed several Division ii all-american sprinters. then
Don gambril came around and actually got me to shut up and learn the
most important lesson in coaching: aim high enough and demand fast
swimming so that you don’t mess up the kids in your program.
a sport history course i taught brought into focus all that my mentors
had preached to me. the course was a survey of recorded western sport
history as measured against the principles of those who founded sport,
the greeks. the principles were agon, the struggle, and its relationship
to arete, the victory. agon meant so much more than just a struggle
to the ancient greeks. it was a process—the good and the bad of the
struggle—that led to honor and fame, not merely a win. arete also meant
more than just a win to the ancient greeks. it could only be awarded by
fellow warriors and wasn’t fully bestowed until after death. it was the
reward for those who truly lived the agonistic system (the process) and
in so doing earned honor and imperishable fame.
240

--- Page 255 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
My heroes in coaching are george haines, Sherm chavoor, and peter
Daland. i learned a lot by watching and listening to them, but the coaches
i worked with were by far more influential. My program is based on all
that i learned from these coaches; each of them, along with my own
teaching experiences, have taught me valuable coaching concepts. at
Santa clara we aim at being number one, and the knowledge that we have
done everything possible to be the best, within the rules, means that we
can accept whatever the end result turns out to be. We don’t use drugs
because doing so would defeat us before we started. Self-knowledge isn’t
acquired by using crutches. We don’t have easy days because we need
to seek the truth about ourselves each and every day. We desire to be
tested daily as we search for honor and imperishable fame.
i believe in the ability of the individual to dream a dream and then,
through hard work, to make the dream come true. i believe that a prop-
erly designed program can help a dream become a reality. i believe that
a poorly designed, poorly organized, and poorly administered program
can kill a dream. What’s worse and most tragic, is that a program that
doesn’t challenge young athletes to be the best cheats them out of an
opportunity to see the beauty of self. My coaching philosophy has devel-
oped a few champions as well as a whole lot of people who, according
to my definition, are winners.
The Foundation of My Program
My program is based on the fact that as speed is increased resistance
also increases, meaning more work (power or distance  speed) must
be produced to maintain that speed. in fact, the key ingredient in the
definition of work is speed. an increase in yards will increase work
output only if speed is maintained, while an increase in speed can quite
easily produce a tenfold increase in work. this is shown in the power
curve (figure 18.1a), the basis for my training methodology. the lactate
graph (figure 18.1b) and the power curve, with a little imagination, can
be viewed as the same graph. Speed, once again, is directly tied to the
production of lactate, and a small increase in speed radically changes
this production. Both sides, those coaches who stress quality—or speed
work—and those who stress quantity—or a lot of yardage—believe that
training must be designed to move both the power curve and the lac-
tate-threshold point to the right of the graph. in fact, this is the crunch
point in the argument between the two sides. One side does a majority
of what they call work at or close to the lactate threshold, using such
work to buffer the power work they actually do. With power tied to the
241

--- Page 256 Text ---
Jochums
buffering aspect of the program, the threshold point will move to the
right because of the full recovery allowed by the nonpower work.
the fact is that it’s the power element that causes the threshold to
move to the right, not the threshold element. it’s my opinion that this
a b
Figure 18.1, a-b The power curve (a) and the lactate graph (b).
system works but only if the swimmer does the power elements at the
levels at which they’re designed to be done. Somewhere in the trans-
lation of this system, the word easy has come to mean that there is an
easier way to get there. the test sets ought to be the power sets—above
the threshold—not at threshold.
it’s my contention that swimming above threshold as often as possible
is the best way to move the lactate-threshold point to the right. this is
not more physiologically sound than the buffering system, but it is much
more psychologically sound. Doing it this way forces lactate conversion
while allowing the coach to work on the swimmer’s mental focus during
a workout. this way coach and athlete deal on a daily basis with the pain
factor that the swimmer must face in a race or over a time period in a
meet. the coach can reinforce the daily lessons that the swimmers need
to learn and to internalize. i further believe that this approach forces the
body to adjust faster, to actually have a more efficient recovery system,
and to give the swimmer a better mental outlook that will allow for fast
swimming over several competition days, rather than just one day. i
think it makes for a tougher and smarter swimmer who isn’t as likely to
fold if the going gets tough!
What scares me about the buffering system advocates is that they
haven’t told us the whole story. From what i have read and experienced,
they have already taken into account that they aren’t getting what is re-
242

--- OCR from Page 256 Image 1 ---
ior

Speed

--- OCR from Page 256 Image 2 ---
ERR 2

--- Page 257 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
quired during the power element. Some of the power required to make
this system really work takes much more than a day or two of rest to
allow swimmers to sufficiently recover. have you noticed that the first
few days following a meet are not very good workout days? Do you un-
derstand that meet performance is work? it’s probably the hardest work
swimmers do, and because of the real, 100 percent effort required, the
swimmers take a day or two to recover from the meet work. i believe that
in reality both systems accomplish the same thing physiologically, but
the advantages in psychological conditioning in my conversion system
far outweigh the buffering system. Since i’m from the old school, the
school that still believes that training is 90 percent mental, the choice
for me is a simple one.
i looked at the scientific truth of the power curve and decided that it
needed to be tied to the principle of specificity, which simply stated says
that athletes must train the way they race and race the way they train or
the program is wasting time and effort. this means that the swimmer’s
program should incorporate the actual stroke, distance, speed, and effort
used in the race one is training for. Moreover, it is impossible to separate
the physical from the mental. i merely took these three concepts—two
scientific facts and my belief in the power of the human brain—and
developed a program that uniquely stresses a combination of these con-
cepts daily. every set, every idea, and every technique in my program
has been borrowed in some form from some other person. even the term
lung buster was borrowed from peter cutino, the best coach and best
friend i have ever worked for. What makes my program original to is
that i’ve redefined the borrowed concepts through the combinations i
use and the way i communicate them to my swimmers.
The Annual Plan
every swim training program should be based on an annual plan. i be-
lieve that one effective way to structure an annual plan is to account for
the two seasons—short-course and long-course—that consist of seven
total phases:
Short-Course Season Long-Course Season
Preseason September to October
Early season October to mid-november Early season april to mid-May
Inseason Mid-november to March Inseason Mid-May to august
Taper March to april Taper august
While these dates aren’t set in stone (due to the ever-changing United
States Swimming calendar) an annual plan is necessary in order to real-
243

--- Page 258 Text ---
Jochums
ize long-term gains in swim performance. it’s been my experience that
each of these seven phases must be planned for every year to facilitate
long-term success. also, i strongly believe that only one preseason ele-
ment is necessary each year, but it is a key to the repeating cycles of early
season, inseason, and taper. this planning formula is not only the key
to season goals but also, and more important, the basis for swimmers’
specific career goals.
each season has its own goals but is also a preparation for the next
season. Short- and long-course seasons are geared around a particular
big meet, but the short-course and long-course seasons also complement
each other. Just as one element or phase of a program is preparation for
the next phase, so is each season and each year that a person swims
preparation for those that follow. this is as true for the swimmers as it
is for the coach. We all make errors and mistakes. coaches and athletes
must learn, review, take some risk, adjust, and improve in light of the
experiences they have just completed. coaches must constantly measure
what is happening against what they want to happen. if a program does
this, then it has a chance to develop champion swimmers and people.
the program in its entirety is diagrammed in figure 18.2. the solid line
is the work output indicator. notice that after the early season phase, the
output increases until the sharp decrease at the start of the taper. the
dotted line is used to illustrate energy resources available to produce
the work output. notice that there is a sharp decrease at the start of early
season. Further notice that there is a very quick adjustment of resources
to meet the work output required during the beginning of the early season
and that this resource is maintained at adequate levels throughout the
rest of the early season and the inseason. excess resources are produced
during the taper due to the drop in work output.
the preseason involves light work output; the body has enough en-
ergy resources to maintain a normal lifestyle. During the early season
phases, a jump from almost no work output to a huge work output
depletes the body’s energy resources. this contributes to a change in
lifestyle and is evidenced by the swimmer being constantly tired, having
a short temper, and feeling the need for extra rest and food. after about
two weeks of this work output, through proper diet and rest, the body
builds the ability to produce the required resources, and the swimmer
soon gets back to a normal routine and lifestyle. During the inseason,
work outputs are increased, but the body has become efficient enough
in resource production to meet usage needs. a normal lifestyle can be
maintained without real sacrifice. During the taper phase, a decreased
work output causes the swimmers to have excess energy that they may
244

--- Page 259 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
Figure 18.2 Variations in work output (solid line) and energy resources (dotted line)
in a typical annual plan.
expend in alternate activities (rather than resting as they should). it is
important for the coach to encourage athletes to rest during this time
rather than expend their excess energy.
Preseason
When i first started to swim, every school in the United States started back
up in September, and that was also the time that swim programs headed
back into the water. no swim meets were held until late november, if
then, so this was the time that coaches introduced or reintroduced swim-
ming skills. September was, and in my program still is, the easiest month
of the year, with one-hour workouts stressing stroke technique. the first
week we do freestyle; then we add a stroke each week for a total of four
weeks of technique drills. all my swimmers participate in these drills;
the older and better swimmers become captains of their lanes and help
the younger and weaker swimmers. this blending of groups during the
first month builds team unity, teaches a common technical vocabulary
that will be used at all levels, and gives the more experienced swimmers
a chance to shoulder some responsibility and leadership.
the program for the month of September stresses the following prin-
ciples in order of importance:
1. Swim technique—stroke drills teaching proper fundamentals
2. proper training procedure
• Organization: setup of lanes, circle swimming, proper order,
streamlining
• Kicking: single file, no talking, proper grip on board, proper
245

--- OCR from Page 259 Image 1 ---
Og

te ee ee. a

Kiar ier

--- Page 260 Text ---
Jochums
turns
• pulling: tubes, hand paddles, pull buoy
3. Starts and turns
in freestyle, stroke drills such as those shown on pages 249 and 250
are designed to stress five fundamentals: press, push, recovery, catch
up, and roll.
Press
the press phase is the hand entry or the front end of the freestyle stroke.
the natural swimmer has an innate ability to feel water and begin mov-
ing the body through it. the rest of us must develop this skill. Quite
simply, this ability is nothing more than finding resistance as the hand
begins to press back, down, and out as it enters the water. the idea is
for the hand to stay still while the body moves through the water, past
the hand’s point of entry. a perfect pull, which is impossible because
water isn’t a solid obstacle, would have the hand’s entry point and exit
point as the same point. the ability to feel water during the press, that
is, to find and then maintain resistance, is the fundamental that must
be stressed. the press accounts for the first 12 to 18 inches of the hand
movement.
the ability to feel water is the difference between natural and aver-
age swimmers. the beautiful thing about swimming is that it is a skill
that can be learned. it doesn’t come easy, but if a swimmer is willing
to concentrate and focus enough, a feeling for the water can develop.
i have had many swimmers, such as tim Shaw and george Dicarlo,
who have proven that the disadvantage of not being a natural can be
overcome by the average person. this is what makes swimming such a
special sport!
Push
this is the follow through or back end of the hand movement in the
freestyle stroke. the hand accelerates to a full extension of the arm as
the hand pushes back through to the surface of the water. Basically this
is the same place the hand would naturally hang at the side if standing.
this accounts for the last 18 inches of the stroke or hand movement.
the push phase is to swimming what the follow through is to throwing
a ball or putting the shot. having left the hand, the ball or the shot will
travel with more speed because of the follow through. Follow through
requires a greater range of motion that allows greater velocity through
the power phase. parry O’Brien took the world record in the shot put
from 54 feet to over 64 feet by increasing the range of motion he used in
246

--- Page 261 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
performing the event. he simply transferred
momentum from one leg to the other with a
crossover move after the shot had left the
hand; this allowed him to double the speed
through the power phase and to increase
the world record by over 10 feet in a rela-
tively short time.
the key element in fast swimming is
the distance a swimmer travels through
the water per stroke. Only with a proper
press and push does a swimmer get
maximum distance per stroke. this is
what is meant by efficiency of stroke or
efficiency of motion. When a swimmer
feels water and maintains this feel all
the way through the push, an S-pull,
the desired maneuver during the
power phase of the freestyle stroke,
will occur. too many times i have
seen coaches attempt to teach an S-pull
by explaining what it should look like rather than how it
should feel and what makes it happen. Don’t waste time trying to teach
something that is best accomplished by teaching something else. teach
the fundamentals and good things will result!
Recovery
this is the movement of the hand and arm from the back-end position of
the freestyle stroke to the entry position. at the end of the push phase,
just as the hand breaks the surface of the water, the arm is lifted from
the water, led by the elbow. the elbow is always above the hand and
arm through this phase.
a high elbow is a fundamental for two major reasons. First, lifting the
arm and hand with the elbow uses a completely different set of muscles
than those used to power the hand and arm through the water. this al-
lows the muscles needed in the power phase to relax and recover. Sec-
ond, the high elbow position helps keep body part movements inside
the flow line. physical law states that any action must be countered by
an equal and opposite action. therefore, any swing of the arm must be
countered by an equal swing of the legs in an opposite direction. Keeping
the hand directly below the elbow minimizes arm swing and therefore
minimizes leg swing.
247

--- Page 262 Text ---
Jochums
Catch Up
this is the coordination of both hands at the front end of the freestyle
stroke. as one hand passes through the press phase and before it gets
halfway into the power phase, the opposite hand must begin its entry
and the press phase of the stroke. this must be balanced on each side.
that means the catch up (hands getting closer together, not actually
catching up) must be the same on both sides.
Freestyle is the most efficient stroke because it allows swimmers to
overcome dead or still spots with this catch-up technique. thus the
freestyle stroke generates constant power. if the stroke is swum properly,
the result is a constant momentum that the other strokes can’t duplicate.
all other strokes have breaks in power that result in loss of momentum
in the water that then must be overcome in each power phase of that
stroke. For this reason, the freestyle stroke is the fastest stroke swum on
top of the water at any distance. the speed and efficiency differential
increases the farther one swims.
Roll
this is the movement of the entire body through the water from shoul-
der to shoulder in the freestyle stroke. as a hand enters the water, the
swimmer rolls onto that shoulder, then flows through the water, going
from one shoulder to the other depending on which hand is entering
the water. the swimmer rolls through the water as if he or she were on
a barbecue spit, keeping a straight body line or flow line that can’t be
bent. no “hula dancing” allowed.
the body’s naturally streamlined position in the water is on the side.
When swimmers roll through the water they are going from streamlined
position to streamlined position. they can’t stay only in one streamlined
position because of the way the arms are attached to the body. When
the roll is tied to high elbow recovery, the body flows rather than plows
through the water. the recovery and roll, when properly and repeatedly
performed, result in all body parts staying within the body’s flow line,
making for a most efficient stroke.
this fifth fundamental is natural on one side for all swimmers. all
swimmers roll onto the shoulder away from the side they breathe on.
the key is to see that they roll as well back onto the shoulder they take
the breath on.
Preseason Freestyle Drills
248

--- Page 263 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
KicKing
Action
the swimmer should push off the wall in a prone glide position and
use a six-beat flutter kick. as air is required, he or she should take one
arm pull and breathe to the side of that arm. the swimmer should take
as many one-arm strokes as required, based on the need for air, while
maintaining a six-beat kick.
Instruction
• press the fingertips down, back, and out, feeling for resistance in the
water. the hand stays still while the body moves. the kick should
be maintained during the arm stroke.
• push the hand through the back end, accelerating the hand to the
surface of the water.
• recover the hand and arm by lifting at the elbow. Keep the hand
below the elbow and as close to the body as possible.
• enter the water at the front end, fingertips first, by placing fingers
on the wrist of the nonmoving arm. as the fingers touch the wrist
of the other hand, slide that hand on top of the stationary hand.
Goal
repeat this drill until perfect. the swimmer must keep the body in a
straight line.
Slide crawl
Action
the action of this drill is the same as that of the kicking drill except that
the swimmer first uses one arm, then the other, and repeats the move-
ments over and over again.
Instruction
• press, push, recovery, and catch up on each side, starting the next
stroke as soon as the proceeding arm finishes a stroke.
• Only breathe to one side and maintain a steady kick.
Goal
teach this drill only after the kicking drill has been perfected. this is
intermediary freestyle that keeps swimmers in a straight line position,
gives a six-beat kick, teaches proper breathing technique, and stresses
four of the five fundamentals—but it breaks the roll fundamental. When
they actually catch up, they are flat in the water. For this reason, this
drill is introduced and broken the same day by the actual freestyle stroke
drill.
FreeStyle drill
249
Action

--- Page 264 Text ---
Jochums
the swimmer should do the slide crawl but not actually catch up. he
or she should bring the hands about six inches from one another but
not let them touch.
Instruction
allow the body to roll through the water from shoulder to shoulder
while keeping the body in a straight line (as if on a barbecue spit). the
body stays in line while rolling from side to side.
Goal
this drill doesn’t teach a skill; it helps swimmers to understand what
they are doing by feeling what is happening. this is best accomplished
by having swimmers tell you what they are doing rather than you tell-
ing them. Only when they come to know what is taking place can they
make the changes that come naturally to the gifted.
Early Season
For senior-level swimmers, the early season phases of the annual plan
mark the start of two-a-day workouts. this is the time to give swimmers
the required base using the proper technique they drilled in preseason
that the inseason and taper depend on. i don’t ease into this phase, i jump
into it for a couple of reasons. First, most other programs have already
been going full bore in the preseason while i was being a stroke coach.
Second, i just love the toughening effect that comes with going from
doing nothing to doing maximum yardage in a day. it makes swimmers
who do it properly psychologically able to handle the real hard work
that is to come. this is boot camp, plain and simple. as in boot camp,
the “commanding officer” can make points and fit young people into
the desired mold during this period.
in reality, this is the second easiest period in the training process
because it’s quantity work, not quality swimming, especially the first
two weeks. in two weeks, your swimmers will adjust to the increase in
training and will once again live normal lives and be normal people.
Stroke technique is stressed throughout this phase, as it will be for the
entire year. the pace clock is set up and operating, the sets are planned
and explained, and the swimmers are ready. the job of the coach on
the deck now becomes that of not merely being a timer but a motiva-
tor. What better way to motivate than to look like you know what you
are doing by talking stroke. never stop sets to do stroke work. instead,
correct stroke technique in sound bytes during the sets. this will help
keep your swimmers focused on the set at hand while ensuring proper
stroke mechanics. if you aren’t using some of your deck time doing this,
then in reality you are nothing but a traffic cop.
250

--- Page 265 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
What about injuries due to high volume? i don’t accept quantity as the
culprit! rather, it’s my belief that injuries come from poor technique,
not repetition (unless it is repetition of poor technique, of course!). Sore
muscles, muscle cramps, and so forth don’t really hurt anybody. in fact
they give swimmers something to complain about. complaining, as far
as i’m concerned, is just a form of bragging, and coaching wouldn’t be
any fun if i couldn’t cause a little of it. if you don’t want to lose swim-
mers to injury, see that they train the perfect stroke.
My practices are all based on a workout format that consists of a
warm-up, minor sets, a major set, and a warm-down. the warm-up is
the swim used to get your swimmer’s muscles warm and ready to work
out. i recommend that the warm-up last 10 minutes, no more, no less.
Minor sets are everything that isn’t the warm-down, the warm-up, or the
major set; they include all kicking and pulling sets. the major set is the
main thing to be emphasized that day. it’s always a swimming set and
could be called it a test set. Once it’s done, both the coach and swimmer
have an indication of where they are in conditioning and how far they
have to go. the warm-down is an easy swim to loosen the shoulders
before a swim or the last swim before going to the shower. the follow-
ing example sets (see tables 18.1 and 18.2) show weekday sets for short
course (yards). examples are for two, two-hour practices.
these examples show 16,700 yards for the day. During early season,
regardless of total yardage, the percentages are pretty close to those il-
lustrated here:
Table 18.1
Weekday Morning Workout
type Set cumulative Purpose cumulative
yardage tmie
(min.)
Swim 800 800 Warm-up 10
Kick 20  50 at :50 1,800 Minor set 25
Pull 400 lung buster 2,200 Minor set 31
Pull 8  400 at 5:00 5,400 Minor set 68
Pull 400 lung buster 5,800 Minor set 74
Swim 200 to loosen up 6,000 Warm-down 77
Swim 20  75 at 1:00 7,500 Minor set 115
Swim 500 to loosen up 8,000 Warm-down 120
251

--- Page 266 Text ---
Jochums
Table 18.2
Weekday Evening Workout
type Set cumulative Purpose cumulative
yardage time (min.)
Swim 800 800 Warm-up 10
Kick 5  200 at 3:15 1,800 Minor set 27
Swim 200 loosen up 2,000 Warm-down 30
Swim 32  100 5,200 Major set 70
8 at 1:20 form
8 at 1:15 form
and fast
8 at 1:10 faster
8 at 1:05 fastest
Pull 400 lung buster 5,600 Minor set 76
Pull 8  200 at 2:30 7,200 Minor set 92
Pull 400 lung buster 7,600 Minor set 98
Swim 100 loosen up 7,700 Warm-down 101
Swim 4  200 IM at 3:00 8,500 Minor set 116
Swim 200 loosen up 8,700 Warm-down 120
Kicking—15 percent
pulling—45 percent
Swimming—40 percent
the major set or focus of this day’s practices is the 32  100 set in the
afternoon. i want the swimmers to do more than survive the set. i want
them to control it, to finish it strong, and by the end, to experience race
pain. each time they take five seconds of rest, they are required to swim
faster. this is the goal for the day.
i look at both practices in a day as one workout. thus, the morning
session consists only of the warm-up, minor sets, and the warm-down.
the purpose of the morning workout in my program is to get stronger in
the water. the emphasis on pulling is my version of weight training.
the morning workout has the same first 1,800 yards or meters each
day: an 800 swim or 10 minutes, whichever comes first, followed by
20  50 repeats kicking with a board on a set interval. i never change
the warm-up. if this bores swimmers, i tell them to count the yardage
252

--- Page 267 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
backward. if they procrastinate a full 10 minutes before they get in the
water, that becomes their problem—because everything else will be on
a watch, and the group changes to other sets in less than a minute. i see
workout starting times like those on a train schedule. Once the train
starts to pull away from the station, you either catch up to it or wait for
the next train. if the swimmers have had a great week up to that point,
i might on thursday or Friday morning, break the kicking set in two,
letting them kick a 500 and then 10  50 on the set interval.
pulling series always start and end with a lung buster—one breath per
stroke for the first fourth of total distance (usually a 400), one breath per
two strokes for the second fourth, one breath per three strokes for the
third fourth, and one breath per four strokes for the last fourth. this is
not to drill breath control per se but rather to ease the body in and out
of the hard pulling efforts. Breath holding in this drill helps swimmers
concentrate on proper technique and actually eases the shoulders into
and out of the middle drills. early season means 4,000 yards or more of
pulling each morning workout. the following are examples of pulling
sets done by the advanced swimmers in our program:
32  100: 8 on 1:20 fast; 8 on 1:15 faster; 8 on 1:10 faster; 8 on 1:05
fastest
4  800 on 10:00; 9:30; 9:00
8  400 on 4:40
8  400: 2 on 5:00; 2 on 4:50; 2 on 4:40, 2 on 4:30
12  200 on 2:30; 4 fast, 4 faster, 4 fastest
2  1,650 on 19:00; second faster than first
the set is limited only by one’s imagination. What works for me is
to keep it simple and to do basic sets over and over again. For distance
freestyle training, all pulling is freestyle. every set has instructions
that go with it. Only during the warm-up, the loosening-up swims, and
the warm-down do we simply go up and down the pool. every other
movement during workout is geared toward accomplishing particular
objectives and is so described in the instructions that are given at the
start of the set.
if you are like most coaches, two-hour morning workouts during the
school year just don’t happen. We have 90 minutes to work with in my
program, and i hold to the routine just described through the pulling
drills. the swimmers are at 5,800 to 6,000 yards in an hour and fifteen
minutes. We then have them loosen up with a 100 swim of something
hard, let them warm down, and send them to school. given a short pe-
253

--- Page 268 Text ---
Jochums
riod, i do treadmills, descending 50s, 75s, underwaters, locomotives,
and so forth. the following are sets i use with my present team when
there are 10 to 15 minutes remaining in practice:
16  50: 4 on 45 fast; 4 on 40 faster; 4 on 35 faster; 4 on 30 fastest
10  75 on minute: each done form, build, hard
800 every other length iM order—iM hard
Locomotive up to four, repeat four, and back down (1 form, 1 fast; 2
form, 2 fast; etc., up to 4 form, 4 fast [twice], before going back down
the ladder to 1 form, 1 fast)
800 treadmill: 200 no pain; 200 little pain; 200 lot of pain; 200 un-
bearable pain
if there are 30 or more minutes remaining after the pulling sets, i have
the swimmers do more with some variety as to stroke. here are some
favorite sets:
2  800 iM on 12:00: first straight, second broken at 75s by 10 sec-
onds
Locomotive up to six, repeat six, and back down (1 form, 1 fast, 2
form, 2 fast, etc.)
1,650 leap-frog: swimmer at back of lane moves to front of line each
length
800 treadmill; 100 loosen up; 400 treadmill; 100 loosen up; 200 tread-
mill; 100 loosen up; 100 treadmill
Our swimmers do 1,000 yards or meters of kicking each workout.
i believe that if the legs are in shape, the body is in shape. instead of
calling a specific warm-down set, you could use the last few 75s in the
morning workout to accomplish the same goal. When i coached college
swimming, we always wanted to beat USc, so would call the last four
75s “trojan 75s,” meaning “real slow.” this was an effective way to
warm swimmers down and let them have a laugh while keeping them
focused on beating an opponent.
the evening workout starts with the same basic first 2,000 each day,
the warm-up followed by a kicking set of 100s or 200s. i never have
swimmers kick the same set two evenings in a row. the 10  100s are a
straight set, meaning that the first repeat is done at a fast pace but is the
slowest of the set, the middle eight will be faster than the first one but
will all be the same speed, while the last one is the fastest. the 200s are a
descending set, meaning each repeat gets faster, with the last one all out.
254

--- Page 269 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
in fact, the last repeat of any set we do is always the fastest. i do this to
reinforce the fact that i expect my swimmers to get the best results from
our time in the water and to train using all of their energy sources.
We do a loosen-up 200 after the kicking series to prepare for the major
set for the day. it is always done at this point, and during the early season
it is a 3,000 to 4,000 series. During the early season we alternate: a day
of freestyle and then a day of individual medley repeats. i have found
that alternating freestyle with iM training days serves as a great early
total-body conditioner. the following are some of my basic sets:
Freestyle Sets
32  100: 8 on 1:20 fast; 8 on 1:15 faster; 8 on 1:10 faster; 8 on 1:05
fastest
4  1,000; 11:00; 10:30; 10:00
8  400 on 4:45
8  400: 2 on 5:00; 2 on 4:45; 2 on 4:30; 2 on 4:15
16  200 on 2:15
15  200: 5 on 2:30; 5 on 2:20; 5 on 2:10
Individual Medley Sets
4  800 iM at 12:00: first straight; second broken 10 seconds at 200,
third broken 10 seconds at 100; fourth broken 10 seconds at 75)
8  400 iM at 5:30
8  (4  100 at 1:20)
• 50 fly/50 back
• 50 back/50 breast
• 50 breast/50 free
• 50 free/50 fly
16  200 iM at 2:45: 8 reverse order descending; 8 normal order de-
scending
each set must have a goal that is explained to the swimmer, and the
set must be executed as planned. What a coach calls should make the
swimmer better; therefore, each workout must be designed to be a suc-
cessful experience for the swimmer. Learn what works and what doesn’t
for each person. Only through careful planning and monitoring will the
workouts achieve what they should achieve.
the intervals mentioned here are for my better swimmers. i use slower
sets or cut yardage for my weaker swimmers. Whatever i call must work,
and i do everything in my power to make it work. the intervals should
255

--- Page 270 Text ---
Jochums
Table 18.3
Saturday Workout
type Set cumulative Purpose cumulative
yardage tmie
(min.)
Swim 800 800 Warm-up 10
Kick 500 1,300 Minor set 18
Kick 20  50 at :45 2,300 Minor set 33
Swim 200 2,500 loosen-up 36
Swim 4,800 set 7,300 Major set 102
Pull 400 lung buster 7,700 Minor set 108
Pull 2,400 set 10,100 Minor set 130
Pull 400 lung buster 10,500 Minor set 136
Swim 100 10,600 loosen-up 140
Swim 10  75 at 1:00 11,350 Minor set 150
Swim 300 11,650 Warm-down 160
really control the quality of effort of early season workouts. the purpose
of this phase of training is to build the base fitness that is necessary to
do more power-based work in the next phase.
the Saturday workout is the eleventh and last workout offered each
week. it’s a combination of the two-a-day workout concepts into one
workout. the minor sets are tied to the one major set, as seen in the
example in table 18.3.
two of my favorite sets for a Saturday morning during early season
are these:
12  400 freestyle
• 3 at 5:00 fast; 1:00 rest
• 3 at 5:00 faster; 1:00 rest
• 3 at 5:00 faster; 1:00 rest
• 3 at 5:00 fastest; 1:00 rest
6  800 iM set
800 consists of
• 2  50 fly at :45; 1  100 free at 1:15
256

--- Page 271 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
• 2  50 back at :45; 1  100 free at 1:15
• 2  50 breast at :50; 1  100 free at 1: 15
• 2  50 free at :40; 1  100 free at 1: 15
in my opinion, you shortchange everyone in your program if you don’t
aim high enough. the goal of any program should be to allow all the peo-
ple in it to reach their full potential. this cannot be accomplished if the
program is aimed at the lowest or average performer; therefore, work out-
put should be based on the needs and abilities of the best swimmers. You
will be surprised at how fast all the swimmers learn to work at this level.
Inseason
the transition from early season to inseason training is a gradual one
that takes into account four significant changes:
1. emphasis shifts to freestyle in the major set.
2. Quality is determined by effort, not interval.
3. a decrease occurs in the pulling percentage of the total workout.
4. an increase occurs in the swimming percentage.
the basic yardage change from our early season to inseason is a
decrease of only 7,200 yards a week, or less than 10 percent (see table
18.4). however, the change in percentage of pulling in favor of swimming
affects the workload. no matter how hard swimmers work the pulling
and kicking series, they can’t duplicate the amount of work involved
in the swimming series. Swimming uses the whole body; pulling and
kicking do not.
this increase in the swimming percentage alone results in an increased
workload. now add the fact that swimmers are controlling speed in the
workout by effort, not merely interval, and it is obvious that the increase
in actual work output is dramatic. the key ingredient in determining
actual work output is speed. Distance swum in a practice is only a small
factor in how much work is actually done, whereas even a small increase
in the speed at which those yards are swum results in a measurable
increase in actual work output. thus, the inseason is the period of the
training program in which we continuously attempt to increase speed in
workouts. this ever faster swimming each week increases work output
with no increase, or sometimes even a decrease, in yardage.
the principle of specificity requires the distance freestyler to train as
close as possible to the actual speed, distance, and time required in the
race. to accomplish this, i have standardized the week over this training
257

--- Page 272 Text ---
Jochums
Table 18.4
Weekly Yardage and Workout Percentages
day early season Season
Monday 16,000 16,000
Tuesday 16,000 16,000
Wednesday 16,000 16,000
Thursday 16,000 14,400
Friday 16,000 12,400
Saturday 12,000 10,000
Sunday Off Off
Warm-up and cool-down 2,400 or 15.0% 2,400 or 15.0%
Kicking 2,000 or 12.5% 2,000 or 12.5%
Pulling 7,200 or 45.0% 5,200 or 32.5%
Swimming 4,400 or 27.5% 6,400 or 40.0%
period. i have three major sets for the first three days of the week. On
the fourth day, i choose one of two major sets. i select the same set every
fifth day. On the sixth day, i select a set that is specific to a swimmer’s
race. and on the seventh day i have the swimmer rest unless, of course,
we are at a meet.
the key to an effective inseason training phase is doing the preseason
and early season phases correctly. if swimmers are going to swim fast in
this phase, then they must be using great technique and must have built
the necessary conditioning base to be fit enough to do the work. Work
output should continue to increase during this phase because each week
is designed to increase the ability to swim fast. everything is adjustable
in this program; details can and should be based on what is happening
each day in the pool. time intervals, individual goal standards for each
set for each swimmer, the balance between fast and form swimming, and
distance totals can be adjusted by the coach as necessary to generate the
desired results (see tables 18.5 and 18.6).
Major Sets—Monday through Wednesday
20  100: 5 at 1:15 fast; 5 at 1:10 faster; 5 at 1:05 faster; 5 at 1:00 fast-
est
258

--- Page 273 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
Table 18.5
Inseason Morning Workouts
Monday through Saturday
type Set cumulative Purpose cumulative
yardage tmie
(min.)
Swim 800 800 Warm-up 10
Kick 20  50 at :45 1,800 Minor set 25
Pull 400 lung buster 2,200 Minor set 31
Pull 2,400 set 4,600 Minor set 61
Pull 400 lung buster 5,000 Minor set 67
Swim 100 5,100 loosen-up 70
Swim 1,000/1,500 sets 6,600 Minor set 88
Swim 100 6,700 Warm-down 90
Table 18.6
Inseason Evening Workouts
Monday through Friday*
type Set cumulative Purpose cumulative
yardage tmie
(min.)
Swim 800 800 Warm-up 10
Kick 10  100 at 1:40 or
5  200 at 3:15 1,800 Minor set 27
Swim 200 2,000 loosen-up 30
Swim 2,000 to 3,000 set 5,000 Major set 63
Pull 400 lung buster 5,400 Minor set 69
Pull 1,200 set 6,600 Minor set 85
Pull 400 lung buster 7,000 Minor set 91
Swim 100 7,100 loosen-up 94
1,000/2,000 set 8,100 Minor set 116
Swim 200 8,300 Warm-down 120
*Thursday is modified and Friday is over after the major set.
259

--- Page 274 Text ---
Jochums
3  1,000 at 11:00, descending
10  200 at 2:15, straight set
Major Sets—Thursday
20  100, every other one all out: 4 at 1:15; 4 at 1:30; 4 at 1:15; 4 at
1:30; 4 at 1:15
5  200 at 3:00, descending
pulling set—10  100 at 1:30, descending; then go home!
Major Sets—Friday
5  400 at 5:00, descending
Inseason Evening Workout—Saturday
Don’t ask for it unless it will work! Start with a swim, pull, kick warm-
up for 15 to 25 minutes. the swimmer tells the coach when he or she
is ready, as in a swim meet warm-up, then swims 1,200 to 4,800 for a
major set. here are some sets i’ve used:
6  200 descending, 2:30; 2:20; 2:10; 2:00; 1:50
3  400, intervals of 4:00 and 3:45; last one is fastest
3,300 for time
2,000 for time
2  1,650 on 16:30; second one faster than first
Our inseason plan rotates the first three days so that no week cycle
can be repeated for at least four weeks. this gives us a four-week period
before we begin to look for real improvement. Following a day off on
Sunday, Mondays are days when we usually have outstanding work-
outs. tuesdays, following a day of hard work, aren’t quite as good. On
Wednesdays tiredness is showing, and we stress to swimmers that the
mind must take over the body. i still expect a great workout, but i do
understand that time isn’t as important as effort. this understanding, i
believe, is the start and the major element of psychological training.
the thursday workout is more sprint than distance work. Sprint
work uses a different physiological system that stresses the swimmer
in a different way, thereby allowing recovery of the systems trained ear-
lier in the week. the workout is usually quite fast and provides a very
good gauge to measure how tired the swimmer actually is. Since some
recovery from the first three days of the week’s work has taken place,
and since the swimmers know that they get the rest of the day off after
260

--- Page 275 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
the major set, the Friday workout is usually great from the first week,
and gets better all through the season. if any of the workouts in a given
week are terrible, it indicates just how tired the swimmer is. adjust the
minor sets to allow for recovery as needed.
the Saturday set is determined by all that has happened during the
week. it’s a chance to make adjustments, to reach agreement with the
swimmer on what is going to be done, and then to see that it happens
just as planned. this workout sets up the next week, builds trust be-
tween swimmer and coach, and establishes goals as something that
must be done, not merely dreamt about. if this isn’t what psychology is
all about, then i’m in deep trouble. the way to reach goals is by setting
everything up so that success is the result. this involves both the body
and the mind. the mind is the key to swimming, just as it’s the key to
life. the mind and body can’t be separated at any time in anything we
are doing. all training is psychological!
the key for the distance swimmer is to get as much short rest work
at race pace as possible. the intervals that are shown in the examples
are those i use for my best swimmers. For those who need more rest,
i adjust the interval or the distance, but only when necessary. given a
little time, some of those average swimmers won’t stay average. they
just need someone to help them see the beauty of extension of self.
My best swimmers kick 50s on 45-second intervals, holding 39 seconds
or better. Most couldn’t do that at first, so we started them at 50-second
intervals. When they consistently were sub 40 seconds for the set, we
changed the interval. Meanwhile they were going 900 yards while oth-
ers, on the fastest interval, were kicking 1,000 yards.
to help in the development of champions, the coach must call sets
that do what they are designed to do. the standard set keeps me and my
swimmers informed of where we are and how much farther we have to
go. the key is in setting up each day’s workout to get maximum effort,
understanding what maximum performance is on each day for each
person, and building a relationship based on mutual trust.
My favorite set is the 20 descending 100s set, which goes from a 1:15
to a 1:00 interval. this set gives the swimmer and coach a lot of infor-
mation. table 18.7 shows the progression i use to get the results i want
from the set.
this progression will take some time, maybe years, to complete but
the fourth level with the last five on a minute (in yards) is the set the
swimmer and coach should be working toward. the third level would
be an ideal set to do in a metric pool. First, look for consistency of per-
formance at a level; then either change the level or the time goals in the
261

--- Page 276 Text ---
Jochums
Table 18.7
Intervals for Descending 100s Set
First set goal Second set goal1 goal2
5 at 1:30 1:05 5 at 1:25 1:05 1:04
5 at 1:25 1:04 5 at 1:20 1:04 1:03
5 at 1:20 1:03 5 at 1:15 1:03 1:02
5 at 1:15 1:02 5 at 1:10 1:02 1:01
third set goal 1 goal 2 goal 3 goal 4 goal 5 goal 6
5 at 1:20 1:04 1:03 1:02 1:01 1:00 :59
5 at 1:15 1:03 1:02 1:01 1:00 :59 :58
5 at 1:10 1:02 1:01 1:00 :59 :58 :57
5 at 1:05 1:01 1:00 :59 :58 :57 :56
Fourth set goal 1 goal 2 goal 3 goal 4 goal 5 goal 6 goal 7
5 at 1:15 :59 :58 :57 :56 :55 :54 :53
5 at 1:10 :58 :57 :56 :55 :54 :53 :52
5 at 1:05 :57 :56 :55 :54 :53 :52 :51
5 at 1:00 :56 :55 :54 :53 :52 :51 :50
set. if the swimmer can do either of the last two sets (yards or meters) on
a consistent basis, then he or she is about to break the american record
for the 500 yards or the world record for 400 meters!
the progression of a swimmer to a world-class athlete can be a planned
event. great swims don’t happen by accident but rather through the co-
ordinated effort of a coach and a swimmer. there is a dream you sell to
a young person, and a plan of operation for making the dream become
something more than a dream. in the majority of cases, with proper
guidance, a young person who has guts, determination, and a tough
mentality makes his or her reality. Does your program offer each of your
swimmers this opportunity?
every coach has had, seen, or heard of great workout swimmers who
don’t live up to their workouts on meet day. a coach must set up a pro-
gram that accounts for the physiological as well as the psychological
needs of the swimmer. i believe that the consistency that the descend-
ing 100s set demands provides both kinds of training at the same time.
if over and over again, a swimmer successfully performs something in
262

--- Page 277 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
practice on a consistent basis that he or she can’t explain away, then he
or she will eventually end up being a solid meet swimmer.
Taper
preseason training consisted of technical corrections and stroke adjust-
ments. in reality, very little work output was required but a huge brain
output was called for. early season continued to stress technique but
added a huge increase in work output. it was a time of quantity swim-
ming to build a base. the inseason continued to stress technique and
added an ever increasing work output as swimmers moved from quantity
work to quality work. ever increasing speed meant an ever increasing
output of work. Following these phases, at least twice a year the swim-
mer and the coach are ready to “let it happen” in a swim meet they’ve
planned for.
the taper, for the distance freestyler, is basically a two-week period of
race rehearsal and rest. the ever increasing output from the preseason
through the early season and the inseason will now be allowed to be
pay off in race results. During a properly planned taper, the swimmer
finally gets rid of that tired or heavy feeling; this results in considerable
improvement in performance.
i have swimmers treat each workout in this phase as a swim meet.
they do a meet warm-up (kick, pull, and swim). the coaches watch just
as at a meet. i time the swimmers in something (rehearsal); they tell me
how much and what they have done; then i tell them what i want them
to do before they get out of the water. i continue two-a-days during the
taper. after all, meets have two sessions, and swimmers should plan on
swimming twice a day at the meet. We start by cutting the yardage at least
in half, then proceed to bring it down to almost nothing. an important
part of loading is “feel”! Do sets that will work toward a swimmer get-
ting a feel for the water and for racing.
as in the early season and the inseason, i treat the two-a-day workouts
as one workout with one major set. the major set for the first eight days
is 3  100 descending with 10 seconds rest one day and 8  100 at their
own distance race pace with 10 seconds rest on the alternate day. the
morning workout times are either 3  75 on 1:00 or 50s on 45 seconds,
depending on whether the meet is meters or yards. after these first eight
days, we begin to prepare more specifically for the first race. at this stage
we cut the work down to include only an actual meet warm-up.
Much more than merely timing the swimmer is accomplished at the
taper stage. the times are important but so are the swimmer’s mental
state, stroke rates, and stroke techniques. it is also important to ensure
263

--- Page 278 Text ---
Jochums
that what is happening is a rehearsal and not work. the purpose of the
taper is to allow the body to experience total recovery so that all the
training that has been done will result in a great performance. Don’t “just
one more” the taper to death. if you have done what you planned to do
and things still aren’t quite looking exactly the way you want them to,
step back and stop. Let rest take over. “Just one more” rarely stops at one,
and additional practice undermines the whole concept of the taper.
rehearsing means swimming repeats at race speeds and race efforts.
reaching this ultimate speed takes time, rest, and technique work. i
use stroke rate and stroke count as tools during this phase. During the
inseason, with heavy work outputs, the turnover or stroke rate (number
of strokes taken per second) tends to be slower than it is when the swim-
mer is rested. if the swimmer uses proper, efficient stroke technique the
entire year, he or she will usually have a set stroke count (number of
strokes taken per length) for racing. the way to increase racing speed is
to maintain distance per stroke while speeding up stroke rate.
Say, for example, that a swimmer takes 16 strokes per length at a stroke
rate of 7.5 seconds for five strokes. During the taper he or she maintains
16 strokes per length but over two weeks brings the rate to 6.5 seconds
per five strokes. the swimmer’s time for the length must have dropped
by 1.6 seconds.
in my program the taper is the time to rehearse race speed, to set
stroke rates that will result in this speed, and to make sure the swim-
mer understands the concept. at the end of one of the 100 repeats, my
swimmer may be given the following information: 53.1, 27.2, 6.5, 6.5,
6.5, 6.5. What this means is that the time for the 100 was 53.1 seconds,
the middle 50 was 27.2 (which translates to a 54.4 100, feet to feet), and
the stroke rates were 6.5 seconds for a five-stroke cycle for each length.
that’s a lot of information. the athlete now knows what pace he or she
is holding, and the stroke rate reflects just how hard it is.
Stroke rates must be based on distance per stroke. each swimmer has
his or her own most efficient rate. it takes time to get the stroke rates tied
to a particular distance per stroke. i’ve never seen it done in less than
10 days, because the key to it is the total muscle recovery that comes
from rest. When stroke rates are brought down to the desired goal too
quickly, a simple full-length stroke count will reveal that the swimmer
has added a stroke or two.
two hundred plus yards in the morning along with either 300 or 800
yards in the evening over the first 8 to 20 days of the taper can’t be con-
sidered work. For swimmers who have been going 2,000 to 3,000 yards
a day at race speed during the inseason, this reduced level at race pace
is indeed rehearsal (see table 18.8).
264

--- Page 279 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
the actual swim meet’s timed pace work for the distance races is as
follows:
400/500 strong 100
800/1000 3  100 with 10 seconds rest—race pace
1500/1650 5  100 with 10 seconds rest—race pace
Table 18.8
Taper Sets
am 3  75 at 1:00 (form, build, hard)
level Form Build Hard time
1 :15 :14 :13 :42
2 :14 :13 :12 :39
3 :13 :12 :11 :36
Once swimmer is consistent at one level, move him or her to the next.
pm 3  100 with :10 rest, descending
level rep 1 rep 2 rep 3
1 :59 :58 :57
2 :58 :57 :56
3 :55 :54 :53
4 :54 :53 :52
5 :53 :52 :51
6 :52 :51 :50
7 :51 :50 :49
Set goal to start at; once completed, note which set is most appropriate for the swimmer.
pm 8  100 with :10 rest, pace work
level reps 1-7 rep 8
1 :59 :58
2 :58 :57
3 :57 :56
4 :56 :55
5 :55 :54
6 :54 :53
7 :53 :52
8 :52 :51
9 :51 :50
Set goal to start at and then go up a level each day. The last repeat is always the fastest repeat, but still pace
work.
265

--- Page 280 Text ---
Jochums
While the psychological aspects that control a person’s training should
be tied to the program design in every phase of your overall plan, con-
sideration of psychological factors is of the utmost importance during
the taper. if a taper depended only on the work on which it should be
based, then it would always be effective for those who had done the
work and would always result in failure for those who hadn’t done the
work. a person’s brain can do amazing things, producing both positive
and negative results that shouldn’t be possible in a given race according
to workout performance.
nothing in the world is 100 percent reliable, works perfectly all the
time, or behaves exactly as drawn up on paper. Murphy’s law, If it can
go wrong, it will go wrong, seems to have been stated by someone who
understood what coaches face during the taper. the pace work times
planned never happen in the taper exactly the way they were laid out on
paper. the first week is usually tough, with both good and bad perfor-
mances seen in each workout. this is when coaches earn their money.
if the swimmers have done the work as you designed it, or even if they
didn’t and they stayed in the program, it is the coach’s responsibility to
carry them to a positive experience on race day.
this is the time when the coach shows no doubt and no negative
emotion; he or she is strong each and every day. every time swimmers
look up for support, they hear the truth as you see it. if you don’t be-
lieve it’s going to happen, then you are doing something wrong. even if
some swimmers only did parts of the program, they can swim fast. it’s
better if they have done the work, a point you should emphasize dur-
ing the other phases of the program or after the big meet but not during
the taper. During the taper, every swimmer should hear comments like:
“You’re fine, right where i expected you to be at this stage!” “great set!”
“Stroke looks great; how’s it feel?” “times will come! i expected this!”
“We’re about four days out; we’re right were we want to be!” You must
also believe in your program, give rest the chance to work, and stick to
the plan. no matter how bad things look early, the taper will work if the
coach stays cool, strong, and positive. the swimmers, at this point in
time, not only want it to work, they will make it work.
During the taper, all coaches have days when things just don’t look
right and the swimmers start to show fear. Your job is to never, and i
mean never, let them see your doubt or fear. go around the corner and
cry if you must but show confidence in front of the swimmers, the par-
ents, and the team. all too many times i wanted to scream at a swimmer,
“What the hell is going on?” But i was smart enough to keep a bright
face and to let my frustration out only after the garage door came down
behind my car at home. Because i have always shown confidence in
266

--- Page 281 Text ---
Freestyle Distance Training
myself, the program, and my swimmers during the taper, my swimmers
have picked up this confidence—and the result has been many great
performances. By this time the swimmers want to believe. give them
someone to believe in—you!
The Big Picture
Look at the program as a whole. See the blending of the phases one into
another. Look at the sets as indicators. Sets can be used to promote the
physiological truths that the program is based on and as opportuni-
ties to build swimmers psychologically. a repetition set system helps
swimmers to understand themselves by letting them know where they
are rather than having to guess. See the program for what it is. it has
accomplished and will accomplish its goal: to produce champions, not
merely gold-medal performers.
i don’t need or want swimmers who expect to be entertained. i need
people who want to be the best—not only the best in the world but the
very best that they can be. i need people who take responsibility for
their actions, who understand that it’s up to them to get the job done,
and who can accept defeat with pride if they know that they have done
everything possible and morally acceptable to win. i need people who
come out of a defeat or a win with the same attitude and the same ques-
tion: “What do i need to do to get better?” i need people who do more
than talk and dream. i need people who do the work and walk the talk
that makes them winners no matter how they place.
My program puts the responsibility on the participants. it is designed
to let the swimmers measure themselves against themselves, first and
always. it demands the truth from them about their own desires, dreams,
goals, and accomplishments. Since they also measure themselves against
the best in the world, my swimmers know where they stand and how
far they have to go. We’re not scared of the best; in fact we want to race
against the best. if we can’t beat the best the first time, then we want to
at least make them think about us, perhaps scare them a little or, better
yet, make them hurt so they’ll know they were in a race. We want the
best to know that there will be a next time and that between now and
then we will be working to become the best ourselves.
is my program boring? no way! it’s challenging. it puts responsibility
where it belongs. it’s simple, truthful, and easy to understand. it’s de-
signed for the people in it. those who have come through it are proud of
the program and of themselves. to this day, they can tell you how good
they were with pride, no matter what their place in american or world
swimming. they know who they are and just how much they have ac-
267

--- Page 282 Text ---
Jochums
complished and learned through their full participation in the program.
they tested and measured themselves on a daily basis, and they have
come to understand the importance of the process and how it has defined
them. they are individuals who take responsibility for their own lives,
for both the successes and failures, and who always strive to be the best
they can be. Such individuals can be beaten but never defeated.
My program teaches the beauty of work and effort. it teaches that the
only discipline that counts comes from within the self. it teaches that
pain is a necessary ingredient in life, one that can be seen as an oppor-
tunity for accomplishment and fulfillment. What makes me proudest of
what i’m sharing with you is that this is a program that has produced
a whole lot of great people and a few great swimmers. i would have it
no other way.
Summary
• a program is a plan of action to realize specific goals.
• the power element is more important than the threshold element
in training.
• every swim training program should be based on an annual plan.
• the progression of a swimmer to a world-class performer can be a
planned event.
• preseason training stresses stroke technique.
• early season provides the quantity base necessary for later suc-
cess.
• the transition from early season to inseason training is gradual.
• inseason training is characterized by emphasis on freestyle in the
major set (specificity), by quality being determined in terms of ef-
fort, and by an increase in the swimming percentage over pulling.
• the key for the distance swimmer is to get as much short-rest work
at race pace as possible.
• the taper is basically a two-week period of rehearsal—repeats of
speed that will be used in the race—and rest.
• the taper will work if the coach stays cool, strong, and positive.
268

--- Page 283 Text ---
c h a p t e r n i n e t e e n
Backstroke and
Butterfly Sprint
Training
eddie reese

--- Page 284 Text ---
E. Reese
not everyone can be a sprinter. not everyone wants to be a sprinter (at
least that’s what i tell my team). there are some basic keys to sprinting
that must be drilled consistently and often in practice: a solid aerobic
basis of conditioning, proper stroke technique (including starts and
turns), and increasing strength. in addition, butterfly and backstroke
sprinters also need to perfect their underwater dolphin kick and have a
sound seasonal and career training plan.
Build an Endurance Foundation
there is no easy way determine early who is a sprinter and who isn’t.
With that in mind, all swimmers should learn and hone their technique
in all strokes and should train their overall fitness properly through
aerobic and anaerobic conditioning. this means that a coach may have
to give up fast, short swimming on the part of younger swimmers now
in order to protect their long-term potential.
For these reasons, i recommend that all younger swimmers—13 and
under—train their endurance as if they were training for a future in
distance swimming. that doesn’t mean they have to swim only distance
freestyle. rather, that means that if there is one, one-hour workout per
day, then three out of five workouts should focus on longer, easier swim-
ming, kicking, or pulling in all strokes, while the other two workouts
can be faster and can include iM sets, relay training, or kicking.
tom Jager, who held the world record for the 50-meter freestyle and
who is still the american record holder for the 50-yard free, made his
first junior national qualifying cut in the mile swim. at one time in his
career he was also the american record holder in the 100 backstroke,
and he was a very fast butterflyer. he swam a 21.4 split in one of the few
100 fly races in which he competed. as a collegiate swimmer, he swam
a consistent 1:36 for the 200 free split of the 800 relay at each ncaa
championship meet in which he participated.
nate Dusing is another example of an eventual sprinter whose first
achievements were in distance events. as a 12-year-old, he trained 5,000
meters per practice and few doubles (two practices a day). it was distance-
oriented training. the first qualifying standard he met was in the senior
national mile event. after his sophomore year in high school, he swam
8:17 in the 800-meter freestyle, 3:59 in the 400-meter freestyle, 1:52 in
the 200, and a :52 in the 100 (still very good times). By his senior year
in high school he had progressed to swim 47.1 for a high school record
in the 100-yard fly, 53.1 for a national age-group record in the 100-meter
fly, and 48.0 in the 100-yard back. in the 2000 Olympic trials nate made
270

--- Page 285 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
the team in the 200 meter free with a time of 1:48.99
all the speed that tom and nate gained throughout their careers didn’t
(and doesn’t) just happen. these gains would not have been possible
without a solid distance and endurance background. in addition to pav-
ing the way for such gains, an endurance-building program for younger
swimmers also provides ample opportunity for the coach to drill proper
stroke technique while building a solid aerobic base. a swimmer must
acquire the most efficient technique possible at an early age and then
continue to work on it. in this way stroke work is like yard work—if it
isn’t monitored and kept up on a regular basis, it will continuously get
worse and will take more work to fix later.
it is critical that a swimmer train for distance ability and race the
endurance events at a young age. the best time to build up an aerobic
conditioning base is before puberty. after puberty, the swimmer will be-
come more specialized in events. if a young swimmer trains aerobically
but does not become a sprinter, he or she will still be conditioned to
swim what he or she is genetically gifted to excel in—distance events. if
a swimmer who did not train aerobically decides to specialize in sprints,
his or her conditioning will not be complete; this swimmer won’t come
close to reaching his or her true swimming potential.
collegiate swimmers who are sprinters must continue to do aerobic
training in order to maintain the base they have built. this is absolutely
necessary to enable them to continue to improve in the ncaa season
and to be successful during the summer.
Sharpen Proper Technique
the key to optimum speed in fly or back is to make the strokes as me-
chanically solid as possible. For example, there are many nationally
ranked 11- and 12-year-olds in the backstroke who put their hand in the
water on its back instead of perpendicular to the water. in the finals of
the US nationals or ncaas, there may be one swimmer every four or
five years whose hand entry is incorrect. at the highest levels of com-
petition, fewer stroke technique errors are observed because the fastest
swimmers are those with the most efficient technique.
Backstroke
the body position for backstroke starts with the head placement on the
water. the body always follows the head. in the backstroke, the head
should be in a position that allows a cup of water to be balanced on the
swimmer’s forehead. this is true whether the swimmer is streamlining
off the wall, breaking out of the water, or swimming. the best way to
271

--- Page 286 Text ---
E. Reese
get swimmers used to this head position is to place a paper cup half full
of water on the forehead of each of your backstrokers. the swimmers
should then swim 25s balancing the cup on their heads. Do this drill
consistently—a minimum set of 8  25, four or five times per week—to
ensure that this head position becomes natural for your backstrokers.
there are some good drills to help your backstroker learn to place the
hand in the water perpendicularly. this placement allows for the easi-
est entry with the least amount of resistance. i recommend the one-arm
drills in which one arm remains at the side while the swimmer focuses
on the stroke of the other arm.
the best drill for hand speed is the spin drill. to begin, the swimmer
sits up with the head and shoulders out of the water and the legs and
hips horizontal. the swimmer then holds the head still and moves the
hands very fast. all drills must be monitored so that any mistakes can
be corrected.
Butterfly
in the fly, younger swimmers often have a problem with the recovery
phase of the stroke. the overwater recovery is influenced by the un-
derwater pull pattern. this in turn is influenced by the strength of the
swimmer relative to arm length. the best butterflyers draw an hourglass
pattern with the hands underwater. the insweep that occurs near the
stomach and finishes at about the hips should almost cause the hands
to touch. the faster the swimmer goes, the more narrow an hour glass
he or she creates. there isn’t enough time for wide sweeps in the pull
when moving fast. On the recovery, the swimmer should bring the little
fingers out of the water first. the hands should recover about six to eight
inches above the water, entering shoulder-width apart. the entry out
front should be shoulder-width apart with the hands almost flat relative
to the surface of the water. the swimmer must never let the wrist bend
on the entry and should keep the arms as long as possible.
in most butterfly races, the swimmer should use a breathing pattern
of every other stroke or one up, one down. Many swimmers tend to
breathe every stroke in races; however, most swimmers are faster with
the head down. So there needs to be a balance between breathing and
speed. putting the head down for every other stroke or using a one up,
one down pattern helps get the hips up and therefore makes the swim
easier. Of course, in the 50 and 25 fly, the swimmer should greatly re-
duce the number of breaths he or she takes. the swimmer should lift the
head forward to breathe as the last underwater outsweep takes place.
the head enters the water slightly before the hands do. the swimmer
272

--- Page 287 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
looks at the bottom of the pool, the hips come up, and the feet are kicked
downward.
Increase Strength
the best way to increase strength in swimmers under age 10 is to sim-
ply have them come to practice and swim. the next step to increase
strength is to add body-weight exercises—push-ups, pull-ups, walking
a horizontal ladder, sit-ups, and running will increase strength safely in
children this age. these exercises should not be timed for this age group.
it is best to give them a numerical limit of repetitions to do. this helps
the athletes concentrate on good technique instead of speed.
Dips done on a set of parallel bars should not be used for most children
under the age of 10. the shoulder girdle of children under 10 is typically
not developed enough to support their weight in that manner.
the 11- to 13-year-old age group can safely gain strength by doing
the body-weight exercises recommended for younger children as well
as dips on the parallel bars. You can start timing this group on the ex-
ercises, but give them a number to do for dips. add lunges and hops.
Limit the amount that the knees bend when hopping by having them
keep the angle at the knee greater than 90 degrees. (Sometimes jump-
ing, landing, and then sitting in a chair or on a bench helps prevent the
closing of this angle.)
the 14-and-over age group can be all over the map when in comes
to strength gain. athletes who are new to the sport will be best served
by doing resistance training in which they must lift their body weight.
Swimmers who have come through the program may be ready to exercise
with weights. the amount of weight for each exercise should be light
enough for the athlete to do 12 to 20 repetitions.
Safety is always the main concern. therefore, those beginning a
strength program using weights are safest when using machine weights
rather than doing free-weight exercises. these machines force good
technique and provide for safety.
Most collegiate swimmers have been in a strength program for a period
of at least three or four years. they are ready to progress into a free-weight
program that is set up for strengthening. For optimal strengthening, the
weights should be heavy enough to cause fatigue in four to six repeti-
tions. the athletes should always have a spotter or two when lifting
free weights.
273

--- Page 288 Text ---
E. Reese
Perfect the Underwater Fly Kick
a big part of nate Dusing’s success was his ability to quickly learn and
perfect his underwater fly kick. he was the best fly kicker in the nation
during his senior year of high school. if the kick is important, and we
know it works to help butterfly and backstroke sprinters to win races,
then it’s worth spending time on it. While most swimmers may not be
able to kick like nate, all 100 fly and back swimmers should have the
goal of continuing to improve their underwater fly kick. this improve-
ment can be accomplished by ensuring that the fly kick is consistently
trained as part of the overall program.
there are two ways to start the training necessary for a better fly
kick.
1. try the vertical fly kick for improving the speed or frequency of the
kick. Swimmers perform this with the arms crossed in front of the chest
and the hands resting on the opposite shoulder. the kick starts from the
shoulders and moves to the feet with a snap forward and backward. have
swimmers count these kicks for 5 to 10 seconds, aiming for 2.5 to 3 kicks
per second. (count every forward kick as one.) One good way to incor-
porate this into practice is to add it to the warm-up. Give swimmers an
interval that is 5 to 10 seconds slower and have them follow this order:
Finish the rep of the warm-up, take 5 seconds, do 5 seconds of vertical
fly kick, rest, and then continue on the next interval. another method
is to have swimmers do the fly kick three to five times off each wall for
every stroke but breaststroke. the best way for swimmers to focus on
the kick is to do the four to six sets of five to eight seconds just as fast
as possible.
2. Doing fly kick on the back with the hands at the side is one of the
best ways to gain the strength necessary to get better at the kick. On every
push off from the wall, the swimmer should be streamlined, take five
to eight kicks off the wall, pull the hands to the sides, and continue the
fly kick on the back. he or she should take one backstroke stroke into
every turn. My team times 8  100 of this set on two minutes every two
weeks. this drill works the abdominal and quadriceps muscles. the
improvement is very fast and continues throughout the year.
Once swimmers have become accustomed to kick training, they may
need or want more of a challenge. One of the hardest drills for improv-
ing the fly kick is to kick against the resistance of surgical tubing and to
kick with it coming back. i have swimmers kick out “as far as they can
go” against the tubing, then kick a few more times. at that point they
274

--- Page 289 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
pull themselves along the lane line to the other end of the pool, then
sprint back with the cord pulling them. this drill is more intense than
the other two drills and should not be jumped into immediately with
young swimmers. Do not skip any steps; there are no shortcuts.
a great way to work on maximizing the distance a swimmer gets off
the wall is to tie surgical tubing from lane line to lane line across the
middle of the pool (25 yards at 12 + yard mark); you can select the lanes
to tie across. the swimmer kicks out underwater with the butterfly kick
and breaks out to the surface stroke after passing the surgical tubing.
this drill also works for older breaststrokers and their pullouts. repeat
25s work best for the younger and less advanced kickers; 50s and 75s
work for the better kickers. it is more difficult to do the kickouts from
a turn than from a push off. Flyers should not breathe on the breakout
stroke.
Construct a Solid Training Plan
We plan our collegiate season around three main phases: preseason,
midseason (also known as dual-meet season), and championship season.
this three-phase season begins six to seven months before the swimmer’s
“goal” or championship meet.
Preseason Training
the daily workouts during the preseason training of the collegiate ath-
letes i coach include primarily aerobic swimming. Of course, the younger
the swimmer, the bigger part that all four strokes play in this aerobic
training. Swimmers race as a function of how they practice, therefore
when they train aerobically they need to train all the strokes often in
order to keep their technique in these strokes polished.
During the preseason, the collegiate swimmer should also make time
for anaerobic training, which builds strength and speed. anaerobic train-
ing offers a coach the best opportunity to see the swimmer’s stroke when
it is most “normal,” or most like the swimmer’s race stroke.
the workouts in table 19.1 are examples of a typical week of training
our swimmers do in the preseason. i have used these warm-ups and sets
a few times. they accomplish what i want from training at this time of
year, and they are aimed at the end results that will come six to seven
months down the line.
the morning practice can be used to work on weaker strokes or any
component that needs to be fixed. if there is extra time, planned or not,
left at the end of practice, use it to work on turns or starts. the turns my
275

--- Page 290 Text ---
E. Reese
swimmers do when they circle swim in the lanes during most sets are
not the same turns they should use in a meet. therefore, it is important
to allow swimmers to regularly practice turns straight in and straight
out from the wall.
TaBle 19.1
Preseason Training
Monday
400 free, 3 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
100 fly or back drill, 5 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
300 free, 3 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
100 fly or back drill, 5 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
200 free, 3 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
100 fly or back drill, 5 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
100 free, 3 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
100 fly or back drill, 5 fly kicks off every wall, breathe every 3 strokes; rest :15
3  200 freestyle kick on 3:30
6  100 streamlined fly kick (no kickboard) on 1:45 (8 kicks off every wall underwater on
the back, pull arms to sides and continue fly kick)
6  50 kick drills (follow the appropriate pattern for specialty stroke)
Fly: 5 kicks, 2 strokes
Back: 8 kicks off the wall, pull hands to sides, flutter kick with hands sculling
Breast: 4 kicks, 2 strokes
Free: 10 kicks, 1 single-arm stroke
3  100 free on 1:25, 100 IM on 1:30
2  100 free on 1:20, 100 IM on 1:35
1  100 free on 1:15, 100 IM on 1:40
2  100 free on 1:20, 100 IM on 1:35
3  100 free on 1:25, 100 IM on 1:30
12  25 swim choice, on :35; 90% effort
easy 200
Tuesday
800 (100 free/100 back) Kick 3 to 5 times off every backstroke turn; rest :20
600 IM (odd 25s proper order swim; even 25s freestyle; rest :20
400 kick; rest :20
276

--- Page 291 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
TaBle 19.1, continued
200 freestyle
2  8  25 on :35; 95% effort
2  8  6 line or 15 meters on :25; 98% effort (dolphin kick on back)
2  4  25 drill on :45
4  400 swim of best stroke, intervals based on individual. Fly can be done fly/free by
25s or 50s or by alternating 50 fly, 50 left arm, 50 fly, 50 right arm
8  100 (25 fly, 50 free, 25 fly) at 1:45. Designate number of kicks per stroke, how often
to breathe. allow free to be moderate.
easy 200
6  50 swim on 1:30. Have swimmers swim fast for best average.
Wednesday
300 free on 5:00
200 back or fly drill/free by 50s on 3:30
400 free on 6:00
300 back or fly drill/free by 50s on 4:30
500 free on 7:30
12  100 free at 1:35 (:06 vertical dolphin kick at the end of each 100—15+ kicks)
easy 100 on 2:00
3  3  100 free kick on 1:45
3  4  50 kick (choice) on :55
3  easy 50 swim on 1:00
8  300 free on 4:30 (descend 1 to 4 and 5 to 8)
easy 200
Thursday
8  25 on :45 from a one-step dive off deck, fly kick first half/choice last half
8  50 free on 1:00. Breathe every 3, 3 fly kicks off each wall
8  75 IM (fly, back, breast) on 1:20, 5 kicks off fly and back walls
8  100 free on 1:35, 25 fast, 50 drill, 25 fast
easy 200 drill at 4:00
Do the following three sets three times through, subtracting :05 off interval and two re-
peats each time:
8  25 on :40, fly breathing pattern first half/back spin drill second half, 8 kicks off wall.
277

--- Page 292 Text ---
E. Reese
TaBle 19.1, continued
8  15 underwater kick on :40
4  25 drill on :45
1,500 fly/free (25 fly/25 free or 25 fly/50 free or another combination that fits the
strength of that swimmer)
OR 1,500 back. Time and record for average splits.
easy 200
Friday
100 free on 1:40; 100 IM on 1:40
2  100 free on 1:35; 100 IM on 1:40
3  100 free on 1:30; 100 IM on 1:40
4  100 free on 1:25; 100 IM on 1:40
5  100 free on 1:20; 100 IM on 1:40
8  50 drill on 1:00. Stroke or kick drill
8  200 back on 3:30, best average with five kicks off each wall
OR 8  200 fly on 3:30, 50 fly/50 free with five kicks off each wall
easy 100 on 2:00
800 kick choice on 15:00
8  50 kick (fastest interval) on :50 (or whatever is appropriate) best kick
8  50 drill on 1:00
6  50 swim best stroke on 1:30 (fastest)
easy 200
278

--- Page 293 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
Midseason
During the midseason or dual-meet season, practices are very similar
to the preseason workouts. in the midseason, intervals get faster and
distance swims become less frequent and shorter. the focused or timed
fast sets increase to three times per week—usually tuesday, thursday,
and Saturday. Sometimes Saturday is a dual meet and therefore definitely
counts as a fast day.
During the midseason i continue to have swimmers do sets of 25s and
15-meter swims and kicks. in the preseason phase those sets precede the
distance swimming sets, but during the midseason they are done either
early or late in practice. i try not to allow the identity of our dual-meet
opponent to dictate the workouts we do leading up to the contest. Some-
times when there is a tough meet coming up, swimmers will institute
the Sit method (self-imposed taper). Usually the best direction to take
before a big meet is to decrease intensity and keep the yardage up.
Once again, make time during this phase to work on starts and turns.
Usually the best swimmers have the best starts and turns. Get them to
help you teach the others. Starting to work on turns just three weeks
before the big meet is better than not training them at all, but not much
better.
Championship Season
this is what coaches and swimmers work for all year. Some swimmers
end their year three or four weeks earlier than those who go to the
national meet, but the following questions must be addressed for all
swimmers:
• When is their big meet?
• how have they trained?
• how many practices have been missed?
• how much swimming and dryland improvement has occurred?
• Where are they in their mental preparation?
it’s helpful to participate in a meet three or four weeks out from the
goal meet—in our case, the conference meet usually fits into this time
slot nicely—to evaluate the swimmers’ status. Some swimmers need
more of a taper than others. i use the times and the way swimmers look
in the water to determine what to do with their training from this meet
until the final meet. the workouts in table 19.2 represent a typical week
of training for swimmers in the championship phase.
279

--- Page 294 Text ---
E. Reese
TaBle 19.2
Championship Phase Training
Monday after setup meet (3 or 4 weeks from championship)
easy 2,000 yards or meters
Tuesday
1,500 warm up (5  [200 free/100 drill] :30 rest)
800 kick
8  50 swim on 1:00 (88% effort; below anaerobic threshold)
easy 200
Wednesday
1200 warm up
500 kick
6  25 swim at 90% on :35
6  15 kick at 93% :35
easy 200
4  50 at 90 to 96% (depending on swimmer) on :45 to :50
Swim down
Thursday
Same as Monday; concentrate on streamlining
Friday
Similar to Tuesday
Saturday
More warm-up for pace work
During one of our conference meets, one of my swimmers went 46.8
for the 100-yard fly and 25 minutes later swam 46.6 for the 100-yard
backstroke in a 25-yard pool. he was unshaved but wore one of the full
bodysuits. he was as fast as he would have been from resting, but we
thought he’d drop some more time by the ncaas with shaving. regret-
tably, the ncaa pool was 25 meters in length, and thus it is difficult to
280

--- Page 295 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly Sprint Training
determine the gains he made from the conference meet to the national
meet. Still this swimmer’s training schedule for the next two or more
weeks would be different than someone who didn’t look “high in the
water” or fast at the conference meet.
Summary
• Successful sprint training is built on a foundation of endurance
conditioning.
• Young swimmers need to develop an endurance base.
• anaerobic training is most effective when added to training after
puberty.
• the key to optimum speed is the most efficient technique.
• increasing strength is essential for fast sprinting.
• Backstroke and butterfly swimmers must perfect the underwater
butterfly kick.
• preseason training should be primarily aerobic.
• intervals get faster in midseason training.
• the taper for the championship meet is highly individualized.
281

--- Page 297 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e n t y
Backstroke
and Butterfly
200-Meter
Training
Bill rose

--- Page 298 Text ---
Rose
the 200 butterflyer and 200 backstroker are special athletes who require
specific training that meets the demands of their events. the 200 fly
and backstroke races include all the elements that make the sport of
swimming so worthwhile and exciting; fine-tuned aerobic conditioning,
technique, strategy, speed, and control all come into play. In my opinion,
in no other race is victory determined by as many factors.
Just as the two races include many of the same demands, training
for these events is similar as well. to excel in both the 200 butterfly
and backstroke, I believe athletes must first understand and agree to
training within a distance-based program. It is rare that a 100 butterfly
or backstroke champion is able to double up to the 200 and vice versa.
the 100 events are power events, whereas the 200 event relies more on
muscle endurance and stamina; the raw speed required in the sprint
back and butterfly isn’t enough for success in the 200 events. currently
a larger number of 100 fly champions repeat at the 50 and 100 free than
at the 200 fly.
the 100 backstroke champion is not often the main contender in the
200 backstroke, in part because of the kicking speed and endurance nec-
essary in the 200 backstroke. with the introduction of the underwater
dolphin kick, it is now more common for sprint backstroke swimmers
to have increased difficulty “holding on” in the back half of the 200.
Before the dominance of the underwater dolphin kick, Kaye hall set
american and world records in the 100 backstroke. at the national cham-
pionship meet where she won her first 100 backstroke title, she finished
last in the 200 backstroke. her coach then trained her to control her stroke
rate and stroke count. the emphasis on holding the optimum stroke rate
and count enabled her to better her 200 race by holding the second 100
with a minimum drop off. the following year, Kaye won both the 100
and 200 backstroke races at the short-course national championship
meet. She became successful in the 200 as well as the 100, even though
it wasn’t her favorite distance. eventually, she won the gold medal in
the 100 and a solid bronze medal in the 200 at the Olympic Games. She
also continued to lower her 100 backstroke time throughout the period
of improvement in the 200.
Lenny Krayzelburg is one exception to the rule that current 100 and
200 backstrokers tend to excel in one event or the other, but not both.
he was a better 200 backstroke swimmer who trained to bring his 100
backstroke to success as well. (he won gold in both backstroke events
at the 2000 Olympic Games.)
the only swimmer in history to win Olympic gold medals in both
butterfly events is Mark Spitz. Mike Bruner, the swimmer who broke
284

--- Page 299 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
Spitz’s world record in the 1976 Olympics in Montreal, did not even
have the 100 butterfly time standard necessary to enter the US nation-
als. In fact, Bruner hit his lifetime 100 fly best of 57.9 on the 100 split
of his world-record 200 fly performance of 1:59.23.
the pacing strategy used by the 200 butterflyers and backstrokers
often determines the outcome of the race. Swimmers can choose from
several different ways of splitting the race to affect the outcome of the
final result: even splitting, negative splitting, positive splitting, or the
“fly and die” method.
the largest percentage of 200 butterfly races are swum (and won)
with a positive split—the split for each 50 is progressively slower. the
reason for this is that in butterfly, sustaining the fine balance of control
and technique with speed is more difficult than in any other stroke. at
the top of the competitive pyramid, however, statistics show that world-
class performances are achieved with even splits (after the first 50 from
the dive, the splits for each 50 are the same.) It is not efficient to negative
split a 200 butterfly due to the difficulty of maintaining the proper body
position in the water at slower speeds. In reality, many butterflyers need
to think that they are negative splitting in order to evenly split the race.
needless to say, the fly and die method of swimming the 200 fly is not
recommended for optimal results.
In 200 backstroke races, even splitting and negative splitting are more
commonly used than positive splitting. In particular, the move from the
underwater fly kick in backstroke to a surface backstroke and flutter kick
has resulted in more even splitting in backstroke.
During the last 20 or so years of competitive swimming, sport science
has made huge strides in identifying, testing, and evaluating everything
that makes up a champion. these worldwide efforts have been wonder-
ful for the sport of competitive swimming. however, it’s important for
coaches to remember that training is not necessarily rocket science. It
still comes down to a few simple facts.
1. the human body ultimately adapts to stress (training) that is re-
peatedly given.
2. every human being is unique. Genetically no two humans are
the same. the gene pool creates endomorphs and mesomorphs,
buoyant and nonbuoyant frames, fast-twitch muscle fibers and
slow-twitch muscle fibers, and so on.
3. the mental capacity to train and compete is also unique to every
individual.
285

--- Page 300 Text ---
Rose
with these three things in mind, coaches must simply apply what
Doc counsilman called “the x factor” to the training of each athlete. the
daily distance swum will vary depending on the time of season (early
season, midseason, and taper) and the energy system being emphasized
(aerobic, anaerobic threshold, etc.).
Early Season Training
early season training, the first six to eight weeks of training, starts with
5 to 6 workouts a week and gradually builds to the normal midseason
regimen of 10 to 11 workouts per week. Our swimmers normally train
twice a day on Monday, tuesday, thursday, and Friday, and once a day
on wednesday and Saturday. Sunday is usually a complete off day un-
less there is a swim meet. the emphasis during the early season is on
developing proper stroke technique and building up aerobic capacity.
throughout this phase of the season, main sets are centered around
gauging stroke count, stroke rate, and distance per stroke in order to
achieve the optimal stroke technique and a controlled pace. almost all
the training sets are descending and negatively split to emphasize the
importance of learning to understand and control pace. By stressing these
concepts in training, you pave the way for successful races. the body
and mind cannot be expected to be able to produce during the stressful
period of a race what has not been repeated in practice to the point of
becoming mental and physical habit. the percentage of the workout
done swimming butterfly or backstroke will vary with each swimmer,
depending on his or her experience, fitness level, age, and the degree
to which he or she specializes in the 200 butterfly or 200 backstroke.
Generally my most advanced 200 butterfly specialists do no more than
50 percent of their total workout butterfly, whereas my less advanced
butterfly specialists do no less than 20 percent of their workout butterfly.
the same percentage ranges apply for backstroke specialists.
the buoyancy and balance level of each swimmer will be different.
those who are very light on the water will usually be able to control
their body position and rhythm for a longer repeat or for more repeats
than swimmers who are less buoyant and are more powerfully built. this
is true for all strokes but especially for the fly; however, both types can
be world-record holders in the 200 fly. two cases in particular come to
mind: pablo Morales and Mike Bruner.
pablo Morales had one of the most powerful strokes I have ever seen.
pablo is probably best known for his famous comeback to win the gold
medal in the 100 butterfly in the 1992 Olympics after the devastating
286

--- Page 301 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
disappointment of not qualifying for the 1988 Olympics. the 100 was
totally suited to his style and strong physique. the 200, in my mind,
was about 104 meters too far for him, but to his credit pablo was one of
the fastest 200 butterflyers in the world in the early years of his inter-
national competitive career.
Mike Bruner, on the other hand, was able to train megadistances of
butterfly in practice without suffering any stroke or body-position prob-
lems. he certainly could not be considered a powerful swimmer either
in stroke or body type. During his younger years, his body simply did
not develop at the same rate as those of his peers. In fact, Mike was the
brunt of a lot of “dough boy” jokes. to compensate for his lack of power
and speed at that point, Mike developed himself into one of the most
highly conditioned swimmers of his time.
proving his worth was very important to him, and the only way he
knew to do so was to take anything his competitors could do and do it
longer. he repeated to himself daily, “your speed will come some day, but
until it does, you have to prove to everyone that no one in the world can
swim butterfly as far and fast as you can.” For years, Mike was famous
for doing wacky things in workouts. when swimmers were doing a set
of 10  400 meters free on 5:00, Mike would commonly say, “I want to
do it fly.” It got to the point that his teammates and competitors consid-
ered him unbeatable if they ever got into a race with him when he was
right there with them after the first half of the race. I believe that Mike’s
reputation, and the effect it had on him and his competitors, was the key
factor in his winning the most important race of his life—the 200-meter
butterfly contest in which he took the gold medal in 1976.
Midseason Training
Midseason training includes the 16 to 18 weeks following early season
training. During midseason training all the physical and tactical elements
of the race are repeated and repeated and then repeated some more. to
develop the endurance necessary, 200 butterfly and backstroke condition-
ing combines middle-distance to distance freestyle training with that of a
400 IM swimmer. During this phase of training, a national-level swimmer
training for the 200 backstroke or butterfly will average approximately
80,000 to 100,000 yards or 73,000 to 92,00 meters a week (50 percent of
which will be done in his or her specialty stroke).
During the midseason training phase, our 200 butterflyers and back-
strokers repeat a weekly cycle over the entire 16 to 18 weeks (see table
20.1). each workout has a different set of objectives. three of the morning
287

--- Page 302 Text ---
Rose
workouts are dedicated to fast kicking. the main set is from 800 to 1,200
meters of quality kicking. threshold training is scheduled for Monday
evening, Saturday morning, and various other mornings.
On tuesday evening, and sometimes on Saturday morning, swimmers
do what is affectionately termed a “butt-buster workout.” the object of
the workout is to stay at the top on the aerobic scale (heart rates ranging
from 130 to 150 or higher throughout the workout) for 10,000 or more
meters using a mixture of strokes and dixtances and never taking more
TaBle 20.1
National Team Weekly Midseason Cycle (April–July)
Day am pm
Monday 8,000 meters 8,000 to 9,000 meters
aerobic swim Threshold freestyle set
Fast kicking Specialty mix
Pulling Descending set
Descending set Negative split
Tuesday 8,000 meters 10,000+ meters
IM work or pace work Short rest, aerobic work
Pulling and kicking sets all swimming or pulling sets
Short-spurt sprints Mixed strokes
Wednesday Off ~5,000 meters
Pace and technique work
Starts and drills
Thursday 8,000 meters 6,000 to 8,000 meters
aerobic swim Test set
Fast kicking Pace work and drills
Pulling Pulling
Descending set Short alactate set
Friday 8,000 meters 7,000 to 10,000 meters
·
aerobic and pace work Max VO2max set
Descending set Pulling and negative split sets
IM and stork work Starts and finishes
Saturday 8,000 to 10,000 meters Makeup workout for those who
Potpourri workout (coach’s missed a workout
choice)
Saturday am
288

--- Page 303 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
TaBle 20.1, continued
National Team Weekly Midseason Cycle
Monday am Monday pm
Warm-up (1,600) Warm-up
Swim 4  200 on 3:05, build an IM choice (1,700) Swim 400, kick 300, pull 3 
after 1st repeat. Pull 800 on 11:30, alternate 200 with 1-2 rm. Rest. Swim 400 (odd
back and breast every 3rd 50. 50s choice, even 50s drill-swim IM order)
You have 26:00 to complete.
Pull Scull-swim (2,700)
(3,100) 3  (4  50 on :45 descending + 4  250 (50 back scull, 50 back swim,
300 at 4:00 negative split and descending) 50 front scull, 50 free swim, 50 specialty
swim) on coach’s interval. Keep efficiency
and technique in mind.
Fast kicking (main set) Threshold freestyle swim (3,900)
(4,100) 4  50 on 1:00 descending; 800 2  (10  50). First repeat of each set
fast on 12:30 or whatever comes first at 1:00, drop interval by :05 per repeat
to :35 before adding :05 to each repeat
interval again. Object is to set a time (i.e.,
200 race pace) and hold through all 10
repeats. Swim 100 easy.
Aerobic swim (4,200) Pull
100 easy on 3:30 (5,100) 1,200 on 16:00. Work off all the
walls and the first 15 m of each 50.
Descending swim Swim (descend (6,000 to 8,700)
(7,800) 6  (300, 200, 100). and negative split)
First set on 1:30 per 100 pace, drop each set * Distance, mid-distance, 400 IM and 200
:05 to 1:10 before adding :05 per set fly 3  (3  400) on
5:15, 5:00, and 4:45 by the set. Descend
and negative split each set 1 to 3. Take :45
rest between each set. * Stroke and sprint
3 
(3  100) on 2:00, 1:45, and 1:30 by the
set. Descend and negative split each set 1
Warm-down (8,100)
to 3. Take :45 rest between each set.
Swim 3  100 (pace, moderate, easy).
Warm-down (6,300 to
9,000) Swim 2  150 (moderate and
than 30 seconds rest between the already short-rest sets. the swimmer
is encouraged to “hit the wall” in this practice, and then to attempt to
push farther to find out if it is the mind or the body that is rebelling.
wednesday is a recovery day. there is no morning workout and the
afternoon session emphasizes technique, drills, starts, and turns. the
total amount of meters covered is usually between 5,000 and 6,000.
289

--- Page 304 Text ---
Rose
TaBle 20.1, continued
National Team Weekly Midseason Cycle
Tuesday am Tuesday pm
Warm-up (1,600) Warm-up (2,000)
Swim 4  (300 on 4:30 [descend by set] + Swim 400 choice on 6:00, 2  300 (last
100 reverse IM on 1:35 [breast on 1:45]). 100 IM on 4:35) 3  200 (last 100: 50
back, 50 breast) on 3:10, 4  100 choice
descending on 1:30
Pull Swim
(3,600) 1  400, 2  300, (6,800) 800 on 10:00, 20 
3  200, 4  100 on 1:20 base. Hold same 50 on :45, :30 rest 600 on 7:30, 16  50
pace (your choice) throughout. on :44, :30 rest 400 on 5:00, 12  50 on
:43, :30 rest 200 on 2:30, 8  50 on :42
ladder (800 to 200) is at
140 to 150 bpm and evenly split. 50s are
done at the ladder pace minus :01 (i.e.,
800 time of 9:00 = 33.7 average per 50
- :01 = 32.7). 50s may be done specialty
with coach approval.
Swim—sprints Swim (may use zoomers)
(4,200) 9  50 variable sprints on :55, then (8,400) 2  (4
150 easy on 3:30  200) on 2:40. First set is freestyle with
last 50 back. Insert an additional 50 back
each repeat. Second round is backstroke
inserting butterfly.
Swim—IM work
(6,200) Swim a ladder by the Pull or swim (10,400)
50. Start with 300 and add a 50 per repeat 2  400 on 4:45, :30 rest
up to 500. First repeat is 150 IM order, 150 2  300 on 3:45, :30 rest
free. each 50 is added in IM order to the end 2  200 on 2:40, :30 rest
of the first repeat. First repeat is on 4:30; add 2  100 on 1;25, :30 rest
:45 to the interval each repeat. First repeat of
each set is holding pace. Second repeat is
faster than first by going the last 100 fast.
Kick-swim
(7,700) 6  250 (200 swim, 50 back) on Warm-down (10,700)
3:45. Descend total time 1 to 3 and 4 to 6. Swim 3  100 (pace, moderate, easy)
Warm-down (8,000)
Swim 3  100 (pace, moderate, easy)
thursday evening is set up as a “quality day.” Swimmers do a five-
week revolving test set cycle which includes 8  100 on 3:00, 6  200
on 5:00, 5  400 on 7:00, 4  800 on 12:00, and a fifth-week test set of
the coach’s choosing. results are recorded for comparison purposes.
·
Friday evening usually features a VO2max set along with more pulling
290

--- Page 305 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
TaBle 20.1, continued
National Team Weekly Midseason Cycle
Wednesday pm
Warm-up
(1,500) Swim 500, 400, 300, 200, 100 on a 1:30 base with every 5th, 4th, 3rd, 2nd, each
50 backstroke by the repeat.
Swim-kick
(3,200-3,400) 4  (swim 200 IM, swim 100 specialty, kick 100) on 6:00. IMers go
IM order on specialty rep. Breastrokers and IMers go 50 instead of 100 on the breaststroke
repeat. Keep heart rate 135 to 145 bpm. Swim 300 easy on 3:30.
Swim-pull
(6,000-6,200) 400, 300,
200, 100 choice on a 1:30 base with 2  300 pull between each rep on 4:15. each swim
rep is at threshold speed (150-160 bpm) and negative split. each pull set is aerobic.
Warm-down (6,300-6,500)
Swim 200 on 3:00 pace, 100 easy on 1:45
Thursday am Thursday pm
Warm-up (1,600) Warm-up
Swim 4  300 on 4:30 choice, drop interval (1,600) Swim 400 on 6:00, then
:10 per repeat. Kick 200, pull 200 on 6:40. 4  100 choice on 1:35, 50 descend by
the round on :50. Kick 300, pull 300 on
10:00.
Pull (3,200)
4  400 on 5:30, descend 1 to 4. Swim
(2,600) 400, 300, 200,
100 on 1:30 base. all aerobic except last
50 of each repeat which is specialty, build
Kick (main set)
to finish.
(4,000) 400 on 8:00
at approximately 80% effort. Then 4  100 Swim (3,200)
descend to best effort on 2:00 starting at the 9  50 on :55 variable sprints, 150 easy
average 100 for the 400. on 4:00
Swim (6,600)
100 easy on 3:30 Test set
5  (4,400) Swim 6  200 on 5:00. Try
(5  100) on 1:20 (1:30). In each set 1 to for best possible average, specialty, record
4 are aerobic, best technique; 5 is threshold all swims.
specialty. Rest :10 after each set.
Swim (choice of equipment) Swim (choice of equipment) (6,000)
(7,700-8,000) 800 (700) on 800 speed play on 11:00
10:00, 400 (250) on 5:00, 200 (150) on 4  (100 [drill 50, swim 50] on 1:45 +
2:30. everything is to be done “speedplay. ” 100 aerobic on 1:35), descend each set
Warm-down (8,000-8,300) Warm-down
Swim 3  100 (pace, moderate, easy). (6,300) Swim 6  50 on :55, 1-3 pace,
4-6 ascending
291

--- Page 306 Text ---
TaBle 20.1, continued Rose
National Team Weekly Midseason Cycle
Friday am Friday pm
Warm-up (1,600) Warm-up
Swim 4  300 on 4:35. Drill swim last 50 of (1,600) Swim 400,
each IM order. Kick 200, pull 200 on 6:40. kick 400, pull 400, drill-swim 2  200 IM
on 25:00 or whichever comes first.
Pull Swim
(3,100) 5  300 on 4:30. 3rd and 6th 50s (6,600) 60 minute sustained swim.
are breaststroke. Coach will randomly stop swimmers up to
5 times during the swim to perform what-
ever time and distance asked on demand.
Swim
Swimmer then continues until stopped
(4,700) 4  400
again. Choice of equipment, but may stop
on 5:30. Odd 50s IM order, even 50s choice.
only long enough to change equipment;
Keep heart rate between 130 and 140 bpm.
random times must be with no equip-
Swim (with zoomers) (6,200) ment.
6  250 on 3:30
Swim (7,400)
1st, 3rd, and 5th 50 backstroke. Keep heart
8  100 from a dive on 2:00. Work the
rate between 130 and 140 bpm.
dive and 1st 10 meters in and out of the
Swim (choice of equipment) (7,800) turn. everything else is form.
8  (150 [hold pace on 2:00] + 50 specialty
Swim and warm-down
[on :40 at 80% effort]).
(7,900) 10  50 on :50. 1 to 5 build to
Warm-down (8,100) finish choice, 6 to 8 ascending.
Swim 3  100 (pace, moderate, easy).
Warm-up
(1,700) Swim 4  200 on 300. Rotate reverse IM
through each repeat. Kick-swim 900 (50 kick, 100 swim continuous) on 14:30.
Swim
(2,700) 20 
50 on :45. First person in line will sprint, and then go to the back of the line, the rest of the
swimmers will swim moderate until they rotate to the front of the line.
Pull
(3,900-4,200) 1,500 (1,200) on 18:00. Come
down at the 500 (400). Do at 150+ heart rate.
Swim
(7,900-8,200) 2 sets of • 4  100 on 1:25 (descend and evenly
split each set)
• 3  200 on 2:40 (swim each rep faster)
• 2  300 on 3:45 (second set is faster than first)
• 1  400 on 4:40
Swim (may use equipment)
(9,300-9,600) 2  (1, 2, 3, 4  50 on :40 fast with 1  50 form
on 1:00 after each section.
Warm-down
(9,600-9,900) Swim 3  100 (pace, moderate, easy) on 1:45.
,
292

--- Page 307 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
and negative split work. Short 15- to 25-meter sprints are incorporated
into the workouts at least five times a week in the midseason training
phase. Including shorter sprints during this phase reminds the athlete
what it feels like, mentally and physically, to swim fast.
On Saturday morning, the workout is a potpourri of aerobic, pace,
and descending work, as well as IM and stroke work. the distance
covered is anywhere from 8,000 to 10,000 meters. Simply speaking, it
is whatever the coach feels is necessary to tie the week together based
on the accomplishments of the previous five days. For example, if it
wasn’t possible to fit in a descending set earlier in the week, it could be
included here. Or if swimmers hadn’t done any specific start and turn
work, they could do so at this time.
During the midseason phase, our swimmers face competitions ap-
proximately once a month. we do not allow “resting” for a meet to inter-
rupt the training cycle leading up to these monthly competitions. the
swimmers are expected to perform in whatever situation they face. I have
found that swimming tired is a great way to develop mental toughness.
It is a win-win situation. If a swimmer does well in an event like the 200
butterfly or backstroke while enduring heavy training, that’s great. If he
or she does not do well, so what? the swimmer has the built-in excuse
of being tired. I tell swimmers that in this situation they can’t lose by
failing, so there’s no reason not give it their best.
Taper Training
the taper phase of the season should be quite individualized; for this
reason it is the most difficult phase for the coach to incorporate into the
training. the length of the taper can vary from four to six weeks to four
to six days! a rule of thumb that I use is the larger and older the athlete,
the more rest he or she needs. For example most of my 200 fly special-
ists who are under age 18 have a three-week taper (of which one week
is full rest). Swimmers over age 18 have the experience to know how
much of a break is appropriate for them. Keep in mind that the taper is
as much a mental break that mentally prepares swimmers to compete
as it is a physical rest period. Sprinters tend to want a longer taper than
distance swimmers. the 200 fly or back events, considered to be more
middle distance, dictate that the athletes who swim them may need more
cardiovascular endurance than those who swim certain other events.
therefore, endurance needs must be considered when deciding what
type and what length of taper to use.
Once the optimal length of the taper for an individual athlete is deter-
293

--- Page 308 Text ---
Rose
mined, approximately the first half of that time should be spent doing a
gradually decreasing version of the midseason training phase (see table
20.2). the daily emphasis remains essentially the same, but the total
distance of the workout is gradually lessened, and the rest between sets
and interval repeats is lengthened. the last half of the taper is based
on two aspects: rest and mental preparation. this is the time when all
the visualizations are stressed. It is the time when the swimmers are
told that everything that happens both in and out of the water is geared
toward the body welling up with strength and power, and toward the
mind becoming clear of purpose. the coach goes through as much
difficulty as the swimmer during this time. everything the coach says
must be positive. when the athlete says, “I feel awful,” the coach must
answer, “that’s great! the taper is working and the mind is telling the
body that it refuses to waste the rest that is needed.” If the athlete says,
“I feel great,” the coach again must respond, “that’s great; the taper is
working just as planned.” In other words, nothing must be construed as
being bad during a taper. Of course, many coaches go home at night dur-
ing a taper and find themselves unable to sleep worrying about whether
or not the desired end result will actually come about.
the bottom line of the taper is rest. If the work has been done during
the season, rest is the best course of action. If the work and effort have
not been put forth, it’s too late to fit it all in now. I have always thought
of the taper as being a love-hate proposition for swimmers and coaches.
the swimmers love it and the coaches hate it.
One common mistake that is made in a taper is oversprinting—doing
too many high-intensity sprints, without enough rest. the phrase, “speed
comes with rest,” needs to be remembered.
training for the 200 butterfly is a beautiful thing. It is the best of
middle-distance, distance, and 400 IM training all rolled up into one
great package. the swimmers willing to train for the 200 butterfly, are,
in my opinion, the kind coaches dream of training—swimmers like Mike
Bruner, craig Beardsley, Mary t. Meagher, pablo Morales, Melvin Stewart,
and most recently tom Malchow. I truly believe that most coaches would
agree that the swimmers who have given them the most joy as well as
challenge over time have been their 200 butterfly specialists.
a case in point is an up-and-coming 16-year-old butterflyer, Juan Veloz.
Juan asked me one day if he could try something that my former swim-
mer, Mike Bruner, had neither done nor attempted to do. I thought for a
minute and then came up with the challenge of going 100  100 meters
butterfly on 1:30. Juan didn’t even blink; he just asked when. I replied,
“tomorrow, but the stipulation is that you must hold your stroke, and
if your times for each 100 are not within four seconds of each other you
294

--- Page 309 Text ---
Backstroke and Butterfly 200-Meter Training
TaBle 20.2
National Team Weekly Taper Workouts
Days away
from meet Yards Workout
15 5,000 to Warm-up:
5,200 Swim 300 on 4:00, kick 300 on 6:00, pull 300 on 4:15,
swim 300 on 3:30
Swim:
4  100 on 1:10 (1:20 back or fly, 1:30 breast)
4  100 on 1:05 (1:15 back or fly, 1:25 breast)
4  100 on 1:00 (1:10 back or fly, 1:20 breast)
600 descending on each 200 (distance swims 800)
Kick: 500 on 10:00, then 6  25 fast on :25
Pull: 500 on 7:00, then 6  25 breath control on :35
Swim: 16  25 on :30, descend to fast in groups of 4
Turns: Practice 20
Swim: Timed 50 specialty
Warm-down: 2  100 together 3  3 and out
10 3,500 Warm-up:
Swim 300, 200, 100 on 1:30 base (all negative split); kick 3
 100 on 2:00 descending;
pull 2 
200 on 3:00 descending; swim or drill 4  100
IM order on 1:40
Swim:
5  ([(3  25 free) + (1  25 specialty fast)] on :30); all
repeats 80% effort or higher
3  300 (250 for breast) on 4:30; descend to 85%
100 easy
3  50 on coach’s interval at 200 pace
Warm-down: Swim 2  75 moderate, easy
5 3,400 Warm-up:
Swim 300 choice on 4:30; kick 300 (back, free, choice by the
100) on 6:00; pull 2  150 on 2:20 descending; drill-swim
6  50 on 1:00 (IM order + 2 choice)
Swim:
8
 50 on 1:00, hold steady pace for 1-4 and descend 5-8
Kick: 200, then 4  25 fast on :30
Pull: 200, then 4  25 on :40 with solid breath control
Swim:
200 negative split holding heart rate < 161
4  200 on 2:00 specialty, should feel easy but fast
Starts: Practice 5
must stop.” he said “Let’s do it.” the next day, after a good warm-up,
we sent him on his way and recorded every 100 time. the results were
295

--- Page 310 Text ---
Rose
heartwarming for Juan, myself, and the whole team, who stayed and
watched in awe. his average 100 was 1:10.2, the worst being 1:12.3 and
his best a 1:05.1, his last repeat!
this chapter has covered one method of training for the 200 butterfly
and backstroke. Is it the only way to success? absolutely not! that’s
the beauty of our sport; there are many “different strokes for different
folks.”
Summary
• training for the 200 backstroke and the 200 butterfly is very simi-
lar.
• endurance and the splitting strategy are important aspects of these
two events.
• Sprint champions in the butterfly and backstroke don’t often repeat
in the 200s of these events.
• early season training involves a gradual buildup in the number of
sessions per week and in the intensity of the sessions. technique
and aerobic buildup are emphasized.
• the percentage of the training in butterfly or backstroke depends
on the individual swimmer.
• Midseason training emphasizes the adaptation to higher and higher
stress levels.
• the mental capacity to train and compete is unique to every indi-
vidual.
• Fast kicking is an important set of the morning training sessions.
• recovery days and quality days are both important in the train-
ing.
• Swimming tired is a great method of improving mental tough-
ness.
• taper training is highly individualized.
296

--- Page 311 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e n t y - o n e
Breaststroke
Training
Jon Urbanchek

--- Page 312 Text ---
Urbanchek
Breaststroke is the oldest of the competitive swimming strokes. It has
gone through numerous transformations during the 20th century due to
rule changes, some relating to underwater swimming and some relat-
ing to mixing breaststroke with the butterfly. Finally, during the 1950s,
breaststroke became the stroke we know today, in which the head breaks
the surface with each cycle except at the start and turn when one full
stroke may be taken underwater.
as far as the technique is concerned, the biggest change has been the
advent of what is called “reverse breath taking.” Instead of taking a breath
at the outward sweep of the hands (glide and breathe), in reverse breath
taking the swimmer takes a breath during the inward sculling. this style
started in asia in the late 1950s and 1960s, and in europe in the 1970s.
David wilkie, 1976 Montreal gold medalist in the 200 breaststroke, had
a similar technique. reverse breath taking was introduced to the United
States in the mid 1980s by the hungarian coach Jozsef nagy, who con-
verted Mike Barrowman’s traditional (flat) breaststroke into the “wave”
breaststroke. Mike Barrowman brought the new wave breaststroke to the
University of Michigan in 1987. the wave-like technique then became
the standard technique for breaststroke swimming throughout the world,
and it remains the standard technique today.
the main difference between the flat breaststroke and the wave
breaststroke is that the flat stroke is driven by the feet and legs (rear-
wheel drive), while the wave breaststroke is driven by the lower arms
(front-wheel drive). the wave breaststroke is more energy efficient than
the flat breaststroke because it reduces the deceleration between the
arm pull and the leg drive. the results of this reduced deceleration are
evident in the upper-body lunge that occurs between the completion of
pull and the beginning of kick phases. the arms give the initial speed,
the upper body lunges forward, and the kick follows shortly thereafter.
the shoulders rise and fall in perfect symmetry. these three continuous
interlocking movements—pull, lunge, kick—result in a smooth wave-
like appearance.
even with this continuous, efficient technique, breaststroke still has
the highest energy requirement of any stroke. It uses more total muscle
mass than other strokes mainly because of the necessary contribution
of the leg muscles to propulsion in breaststroke. this higher energy
requirement means higher energy consumption and lactate buildup
for breaststroke swimmers. thus, in addition to training the body to
tolerate lactate, training effectively for the wave breaststroke technique
requires specific stroke-related training that focuses on the three major
components of the stroke: the pull, the lunge, and the kick. training for
298

--- Page 313 Text ---
Breaststroke Training
the 100 and 200 breaststroke events is similar because breaststroke is
such a technique-driven stroke.
The Pull
the breaststroke pull itself incorporates three distinct components:
1. The outsweep—arms are fully extended, palms face outward
(walleyed position) to approximately the 9 o’clock and 3 o’clock
positions (9:30 to 2:30 to be most accurate).
2. The downsweep—elbows remain close to the surface. the fore-
arms, led by the hands, bend the elbows to about 90 degrees. at
the same time the shoulders are hunched until they touch the
earlobes.
3. The insweep—hollowing of the back begins here. the quickest
movement of the hands takes place; movement is in an inward and
forward direction. head is kept facing down until the insweep is
completed.
The Lunge
the lunge involves changing the shape of the back from hollow to round,
resembling a dolphin’s back. this is the most distinct movement of the
wave breaststroke. then hands and forearms are thrust forward on the
surface of the water. the palms face down for added support and to keep
the shoulders from falling down too fast (continue the wave). the head
will be the last part to jump into the lunge.
The Kick
the heels begin to rise at the end of the insweep of the hands. Swimmers
use the hamstring muscles to accelerate the feet until they touch the but-
tocks. the key point in timing the kick is that the heels and shoulders
are at their highest points at the same time. the feet should thrust out
and backward with gradual acceleration; ankles and feet are extended
and pointed to hold a streamlined position for minimal resistance dur-
ing the body’s highest velocity.
For additional breaststroke technique and drills, see chapter 14.
Training Technique
when setting up a breaststroke training program, a coach has to take
into account the importance of the timing and rhythm of the three com-
ponents—the pull, the lunge, and the kick—of the wave breaststroke.
299

--- Page 314 Text ---
Urbanchek
It’s important to train each of these parts separately and to use the full
stroke for only about 20 percent of total training time. the total amount
of breaststroke and breaststroke-related drills could total 50 percent or
more of total training for natural breaststrokers. the coach must take
individual differences into consideration, especially for “man-made”
breaststrokers who might train breaststroke for individual medley swim-
ming purposes only.
Breaststroke Drills
Sculling. with chin up, keeping the head steady, the swimmer sculls
with the hands, being careful to avoid any up-and-down movement
of the shoulders. the dolphin kick should be kept to a minimum.
have the swimmer try going forward with the sculling movement
of the hands. this exercise helps swimmers develop a feel for the
water and correct hand pitch.
Pulling. this drill should take up a majority of breaststroke training.
It can be done with or without small paddles (big paddles slow
down the insweep and lunging) and with or without fins. I do not
recommend using a pull buoy because it gives a false buoyancy to
the swimmer’s body. Instead, I recommend that the swimmer use
a very slight dolphin kick not for propulsion but just to keep the
lower body afloat. pulling drills should be done with a very fast
lunging movement. this drill can be used also as a training set of
repeat 25s, 50s, and 100s.
Pulling mixed with underwater pulling. Underwater pulling helps
develop continuous arm movement (there is no dead time in the
stroke because the swimmer does not come up to breathe). a coach
can mix the drill by alternating two pulls on top and two pulls un-
derwater, three and three, four and four, and so on. this drill can
also be used as a training set. Swimmers should keep the dolphin
kick light and use only one dolphin kick per pull cycle.
Kicking. Swimmers kick without kickboards but can use paddles.
have the swimmer perform two or three rapid kicks underwater
while in a streamlined position with the arms fully extended and
shoulders locked on the earlobes. the swimmer should then come
up for a full stroke, and after taking a breath, dive back underwater.
this drill can also be used as a training set. It is best used in 50s and
100s in intervals. this drill builds great rhythm, and the controlled
breathing helps to develop anaerobic capacity.
Swimming. these drills mix breaststroke swimming on the surface
300

--- Page 315 Text ---
Breaststroke Training
with breaststroke swimming underwater, such as two strokes on top
and two strokes under; combinations of three and three and four
and four also work well. this drill can be used as a good training
set from 50s to 400s in length. the timed 400 can be used as a test
(four up and four down) throughout the season to monitor anaerobic
capacity improvement.
Breaststroke Training Sets
Most main sets for breaststrokers are essentially made up of the above
training drills in some combination. I do not recommend using straight
sets of long duration. Use straight sets only for testing purposes and
for short duration (up to 800 total) in interval swimming (e.g., 8  100
meters at 1:45 or 4  200 meters at 3:30).
resting intervals for breaststroke need to be longer than for freestyle or
backstroke training. Usually 30 to 40 seconds of rest is required (regard-
less of the distance of interval) to be able to maintain proper technique.
Use this same rest interval when any of the drills are done in underwa-
ter-overwater combinations.
Training the Anaerobic System
for Breaststroke
Because of the high energy requirement in breaststroke, it is important
to do training that develops the body’s ability to use anaerobic energy.
this can be incorporated into the daily workouts by having swimmers
perform most of the breaststroke training drills for kicking and pulling
underwater. Because of the nature of breaststroke training (mostly com-
ponent work: pulling, lunging, and kicking), it can be very difficult to
establish an accurate threshold for training speed. Instead, I recommend
using heart rates to guide anaerobic training. Using the manual counting
method for 10 seconds is a reasonably accurate way to determine which
energy system is used:
Moderate intensity aerobic (en1)—120 to 150 beats per minute
anaerobic threshold (en2)—150 to 170 beats per minute
·
Maximal oxygen uptake (Vo2max, en3)—170 to 190 beats per min-
ute
higher lactate production (Sp1-2)—190 or more beats per minute
(maximal heart rate)
301

--- Page 316 Text ---
Urbanchek
Because breaststroke swimming is the least economical of the strokes
coupled with underwater (hypoxic) swimming, it elicits higher heart
rates during training than other strokes. when training at altitude, the
stress in breaststroke training (increased lactate buildup) is greater than
for other strokes and must be taken into account in designing training
sets.
Periodization of an Annual Training Plan
the University of Michigan training cycle includes two mesocycles or
semiannual plans: a 30-week short-course collegiate season from Sep-
tember through March, and a 20- to 22-week long-course summer season
from april through august. Figure 21.1 depicts a model of the 30-week
collegiate training season. It indicates the total amount of meters or yards
per week along with the percentage of training that occurs within the
specific training zones that train specific energy systems.
this short-course mesocycle includes four macrocycles. the first
macrocycle is 12 weeks long, from September through november, with
a major competition at the end. During this macrocycle, the first 6 weeks
Figure 21.1 The collegiate training season.
302

--- OCR from Page 316 Image 1 ---
‘

70,000

60,000

50,000

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

ae ee Oe

THe a4 SST FS WIM ISIE 1s el ae aoe ee
Hees of feining

--- Page 317 Text ---
Breaststroke Training
are devoted to aerobic training and skill development with the heart rate
pulse not exceeding 150 beats per minute (bpm) in any workout. the
second 6 weeks include aerobic and anaerobic threshold training with
heart rates in the 150 to 175 bpm range and above threshold zones at
·
Vo2max (180 to 190 bpm) and lactate production with maximum heart
rate. the last week in the cycle is devoted to a short taper (rest period)
followed by a major midseason competition.
the second macrocycle is also 12 weeks long. this cycle includes
only 3 weeks of aerobic endurance training followed by full training
in all training zones and energy systems. More emphasis is paid to
·
V o2max (race pace) and lactate-production work. this period also in-
cludes the competitive dual-meet season with two to three dual meets
per month.
the third macrocycle is the taper period that extends 3 to 4 weeks
in preparation for the conference championship. Dryland workouts
and weight exercises are reduced to maintenance levels (50 percent)
and dropped completely in the last 10 days. total training distance is
gradually reduced from 60,000 meters or yards per week to 30,000 to
20,000 meters or yards per week out from the competition. Individual
differences come into play for each swimmer’s taper.
the fourth macrocycle is the period between the conference champion-
ships and the ncaa championships. It is usually a four-week cycle that
includes one week of aerobic endurance work (total of 60,000 meters or
yards), 10 days of full training zones (40,000 to 50,000 meters or yards),
and 10 days of taper period.
this weekly training plan can be broken into two three-day micro-
cycles, each including five workouts. the microcycle includes a 40- to
60- minute Monday afternoon threshold workout of breaststroke; a tues-
day afternoon focus on descending sets/subjective individual medley
and breaststroke combinations; and a wednesday afternoon workout in
·
the anaerobic zone, with breaststroke sets done at V o2max (race pace)
for lactate-threshold development. the following section shows the
details of sample workouts for one long-course microcycle shown in
table 21.1.
Monday Morning
Warm-up. 2,000 meters of mixed aerobic skills and drills.
Preset. a set of 800 to 1,000 meters total designed to get heart rate up.
Short-distance 25s, 50s, or 75s. Individual medley rotation work,
short rest intervals.
Hypoxic pulling set. 800 to 1,200 meters of freestyle or intervals; 8
 100 breaststroke pulling, 2 up/4 underwater, 30 to 40 seconds
rest.
303

--- Page 318 Text ---
TaBle 21.1 Urbanchek
University of Michigan Weekly Training Cycle—Mid-
season Breaststroke Group
am Pool Supplemental pm Pool
Mon. aerobic technique Dryland Main set: anaerobic
Pull/power Medicine ball threshold work
Kick/endurance 3,000-4,000 meters
Hypoxic swimming energy system eN2
Fin swimming 7,000 meters
5,500 meters
Tues. IM/breaststroke Strength training Main set: IM or breastroke
Recovery drills Weight room active rest
Skill work Go by feel, subjective
Off-stroke work easy/fast
Kick power energy systems eN1
Swim-specific power and eN3
(buckets and stretch cords) 7,000 meters
Positive and negative work
(speed assistance)
6,000 meters
Wed. Off Dryland Main set: breaststroke
·
Makeups Medicine ball VO2max and lactate work
Test sets
energy systems eN3,
SP1, SP2
5,000-6,000 meters
Thurs. aerobic recovery work Strength training Main set: anaerobic
Drills Weight room threshold breaststroke and IM
Hypoxic swimming energy system eN2
Speed play (:06 to :12 7,000 meters
per surge)
Skills (starts and turns)
5,500 meters
Fri. aerobic power speed Dryland Main set: breaststroke active rest
Fins Medicine ball Component training
Buckets, stretch cords • kick
Negative and positive work • pull
(speed assistance) • swim
6,000 meters energy systems eN1, eN2, eN3
7,000 meters
·
Sat. Main set: VO2max (race pace) Strength training Off
lactate production Weight room
Test sets
energy systems eN3,
SP1, SP2
5,000-6,000 meters
Sun. Off Off
Sleep in
Total of 10 workouts equals 60,000 to 65,000 meters per week.
304

--- Page 319 Text ---
Breaststroke Training
Endurance kick set. Breaststroke 4  200, 30 seconds rest.
Monday Afternoon
Warm-up. 400 freestyle drills; 400 rimo (IM backwards); 6  150 (50
fly, 50 back, 50 breast) at 2:30.
Preset. 12  50 (1 fly, 1 free) at :45.
Main set. 4,000 meters threshold work, pulse 150 to 175 bpm. 1:00
rest between sets.
• 8  50 breaststroke at 1:00 descending 1 to 4 (:35). work pullouts
and fast, lunging finish.
• 4  100 breaststroke at 1:50 (25 3 kicks per pull, 25 pull, 50
swim). hold 1:16.
• 6  150 breaststroke at 2:40 (50 2 kicks per pull, 50 pull 2 up/2
down, 50 swim). hold under 2:00.
• 3  300 breaststroke at 5:00 (100 2 kicks per pull, 100 pull, 100
swim). hold under 4:00.
• 4  150 breaststroke at 2:40 (50 kick, 50 pull 4 up/2 down, 50
swim 4 up/4 down) descending 1 to 4.
• 4  100 breaststroke at 2:00. Best average swimmer can hold
(1:12).
• 8  50 breaststroke at 1:00. Keep stroke count at 18 and hold at
:33.
Swim down. 300 (50 free/50 back).
Tuesday Morning
Warm-up. 1,500 total, mixed strokes.
Off-stroke drills. 1,200 total, 300 of each stroke.
Power kick. 8  50 at 1:30 using five-gallon bucket attached to waist
by belt and four-foot stretch cord.
Power pull. 8  50 at 1:30 using bucket.
Fin swimming recovery. 800 total, mixed freestyle and backstroke.
Breaststroke tethered swimming. Use stretch cords attached to
waist.
• negative work: 8 to 10 max stretched 25 to 40 meters. at the
end of full stretch, continue swimming in place for :15 to :20 at
200-meter stroke rate. rest for :10.
• positive work: Swim back, speed assisted breaststroke.
Transition work. IM tethered swimming:
305

--- Page 320 Text ---
Urbanchek
• 4  max stretch butterfly going out (negative)/backstroke speed
assist coming home (positive).
• 4  max backstroke/breaststroke.
• 4  max breaststroke/freestyle.
Tuesday Afternoon
Warm-up. 600 free plus 4  100 IM at 1:30; 400 IM (50 drill/50 swim);
6  100 freestyle at 1:20 descending 1 to 3.
Preset.
• 4  100 (50 fly/50 back) at 1:30 descending 1 to 4.
• 4  100 (50 back/50 breast) at 1:30 descending 1 to 4.
• 4  100 (50 breast/50 free) at 1:30 descending 1 to 4.
Main set A. active rest (slow to fast swimming)
• 4  (50 fly easy at :40 + 100 back at 1:30) descending 1 to 4 to
400 IM pace.
• 4  (50 back easy at :40 + 100 breast at 1:30) descending 1 to 4
to 400 IM pace.
• 4  (50 breast easy at :50 + 100 free at 1:30) descending 1 to 4
to 400 IM pace.
Fin recovery swim. 400 freestyle.
Main set B. active rest breaststroke.
• 4  (50 free easy at :50 + breaststroke at :50) descending to 200
race pace.
• 4  (50 free easy at :50 + breaststroke at :50) at 200 pace + :01
per 50.
• 4  (50 free easy at :50 + breaststroke at :50) at 200 race pace
per 50.
• 4  (50 free easy at :50 + breaststroke at :50) at 200 race pace
-:01 per 50.
Swim down fins. 400 (100 free/100 back).
Wednesday Afternoon
Warm-up. 800 (400 free, 400 mixed); 600 (300 free, 300 IM [75s of
each stroke]).
Preset. 6  75 fly-back-breast at 1:10 descending 1 to 3; 6  75 free at
1:00 descending 1 to 3.
Kick. 4  150 kick at 3:00 (50 3 kicks per pull, 50 2 kicks per pull,
306

--- Page 321 Text ---
Breaststroke Training
50 regular).
Pull. 8  100 at 1:45; 2  (25 chin up + 25 fast lunges)
·
Main set. Vo2max (pulse 180 to 200 bpm range)—4  200 breaststroke
at 8:00 sendoffs.
• 50 from dive, going out at 200 pace, controlled at 1:30.
• 100 from push off, mid 100 for 200 race pace at 2:30.
• 50 from dive, max speed coming home at 1:30.
add up 200 time. Should be 4.0 seconds under your goal 200-yard
time. average = 1:50.0 (26.0, 58.0, 26.0).
Recovery swim with fins. 500 continuous lactate removal.
Dryland Training
Dryland training works to improve flexibility and strength in three spe-
cific areas: core, upper body, and lower body. the body’s core strength
needs to be established first. this strengthening can start as early as
high school using a general strength-training program that targets the
core muscles (abdominals, back, hamstrings, and quadriceps). once the
core strength is established, strength that is more specific to breaststroke
can be developed.
the wave breaststroke requires powerful upper-body strength from the
fingertips to fingertips across the chest and back muscles. one of the best
methods for strength improvement in this area is using a medicine ball
routine of 15 to 45 minutes in duration three times per week. Special
emphasis must be paid to shoulder shrug flexibility for fast lunging.
to strengthen the lower body for breaststroke, work on strengthen-
ing the adductor muscles of the thigh (closing the legs together) and
the knee extensors (quadriceps muscle). Strengthening the hamstring
muscles is also important so that swimmers can bring the heels to the
buttocks fast. pay attention to ankle flexibility, especially dorsiflexion
(toes toward shin bone), by stretching the achilles tendon. Squat jumps
on a flat surface or steps are an excellent way to strengthen the knee ex-
tensors. a good strengthening and stretching exercise is rising up from
a kneeling-sitting position, starting with the insteps on the floor and
the buttocks between the heels. this is a very good way to dorsiflex the
ankles and to help the inward rotation of the knees. Use caution! take
time to gradually increase flexibility so that there is less risk of injury.
here are some other effective dryland exercises that simulate some of
the movements specific to breaststroke.
the Vasa trainer can be used for the catch and pull phase of the
breaststroke (outward and downward sweep in breaststroke). this de-
307

--- Page 322 Text ---
Urbanchek
vice helps develop hand, wrist, and forearm strength. the Vasa trainer
is also an excellent training device for freestyle and butterfly strokes. It
allows elbow extension from 90 to180 degrees for triceps development.
It also benefits acceleration through a full range of motion in freestyle
and fly training.
Stretch cords (tubing) may be substituted for the Vasa trainer. Stretch
tubing provides a better way to accurately simulate the breaststroke pull
as it is done in the water.
Breaststroke bench (sled) may be used for breaststroke kick simulation.
the Vasa trainer is anchored down two feet from a padded wall. Lying
on the stomach on the Vasa trainer sled, the swimmer kicks against the
wall, pushing off with the insteps to drive the body up on the sled. the
goal is a soft landing on the padded wall with an explosive push off.
the swimmer should do 12 to 20 repetitions following a good warm-up.
Use caution, for this exercise is extremely stressful on the knees and
ankles.
Swim bench. this device is not very specific for breaststroke training,
but it can be used for improving specific power for other strokes. Interval
sets of 4  :45 at the #4 setting for freestyle and at the #2 or #3 settings
for butterfly are beneficial.
Summary
• the wave breaststroke is driven by the lower arms; the flat breast-
stroke was driven by the legs.
• Lunging makes the new breaststroke more energy efficient.
• Breaststroke has the highest energy requirement of any stroke.
• the rhythm of the pull, lunge, and kick is important in setting up
a breaststroke training program.
• training drills for breaststroke include sculling, pulling variations,
kicking, and swimming variations.
• training sets for breaststroke are made up of combinations of train-
ing drills.
• the amount of breaststroke and breaststroke-related drills can be
50 percent or more of the total training load.
• Breaststroke threshold training speed is difficult to accurately estab-
lish. heart rate is a better indicator of whether an athlete is training
at his or her anaerobic threshold.
• Flexibility and strength training are essential for breaststroke suc-
308

--- Page 323 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e n t y - t w o
Individual Medley
Training
Dick Shoulberg

--- OCR from Page 323 Image 1 ---
Fe a

T
chad
ieoene epee

--- Page 324 Text ---
Shoulberg
Before I get into the heart of the individual medley training, let me ex-
plain my coaching philosophy and why I do the things I do. I’ve had 13
years of experience coaching ywca, yMca, and summer club swim
teams and am finishing my 31st year at Germantown academy as the
aquatics director and head swim coach of the school and club teams.
I also teach five swimming classes a day, from pre-K through grade 12
including lifesaving.
My philosophy, as a grass-roots swim coach, is that it is important to
expose athletes to all four competitive strokes and not to allow them to
specialize in any one event or one stroke before the age of 12. condition-
ing athletes with all four strokes creates a stronger team atmosphere, as
all the athletes practice together, and most important, it is the best way
to develop total body strength, coordination, and balance in the young
or developmental swimmer. working all four strokes each day combats
the fatigue factor in training, and changing the stroke patterns builds
more strength than doing only one pattern per day. If you keep accurate
records—daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly—you will be able to analyze
them and see for yourself the benefits of training well-rounded swim-
mers in all four strokes.
In my opinion, the IM incorporates everything a swimmer needs to
know about swimming. It teaches proper pace, race strategy, condition-
ing, and transitional turns. the IM specialist may not be an athlete who
is going to excel in one particular stroke, but he or she will be able to
combine all four strokes very successfully. an accomplished all-around
swimmer in the developmental stage may be the athlete college teams
are most interested in recruiting.
Decreasing Freestyle Training
every year from 1980 through 1992 an individual medley (IM) swimmer
from our program represented the United States on the national a team,
and many years we sent more than one. During the 1970s, I focused
more on total yardage than on the range of movement in swimmers’
stroke patterns during training. But after studying the training patterns
I decided to change them in the 1980s by increasing the percentage of
butterfly, backstroke, and breaststroke in training and by decreasing our
freestyle training (per day, week, month, and year) to about 42 percent
of the total. this way, my flyers, backstrokers, and breaststrokers would
increase the percentage of swimming their primary stroke each day (to
about 25 percent), but would still work all four strokes every day.
one reason I love the IM is that it forces me to teach and train the ath-
310

--- Page 325 Text ---
Individual Medley Training
letes’ less efficient strokes. never tell athletes that they are lousy breast-
strokers, backstrokers, or butterflyers. rather, tell them which stroke is
their least efficient stroke and dedicate time in their training to correcting
flaws. In our program every thursday morning is “less efficient stroke
morning.” During this time the athletes work on drills that teach them
to be aware to the speed of the stroke that they need to work on.
Training IM Endurance and Speed
I prefer to train swimmers for the longest IM event, the 400 IM, or for
the 12-and-unders, the 200 IM, rather than the 100 IM. the longer race
incorporates all the elements they need—stroke mechanics, endurance,
speed, starts, and turns—while the shorter event does not cover endur-
ance as adequately.
For the 400 IM, I tell my athletes to focus on conserving energy in their
primary stroke but not to be afraid to use their speed. I also emphasize
the need to negative split the 100 leg of their least efficient stroke. re-
ally, I want all four strokes to be negative split—this helps swimmers
build up tolerance to swim hard in the second half of the stroke and
push their threshold. with the fly that is sometimes hard to do, given
the excitement of the race and the effect of the dive, but if swimmers
train the center part of the IM, the back and breast, they will find it very
easy to settle down and use proper pace.
I tell my IM swimmers to increase their speed in the last half of the
breaststroke and to try to get into the freestyle leg before their opponents.
If your athlete is swimming freestyle while the competition is finish-
ing up swimming breaststroke, your swimmer will be tough to beat. If
you don’t train enough breaststroke, your athletes will spend too much
energy trying to get ahead of their competitors before the freestyle leg
and the resulting fatigue will cause them to be inefficient in the freestyle
leg. Many great swimmers have speed in the fly and back, are decent
in the breast, and are terrific individual freestylers, but can’t seem to
bring home the freestyle leg of the IM. I think this failure is caused by
not training enough breaststroke, and more important, by not training
enough combinations of back-breast, and breast-free. I think the combi-
nation of types of training—the mix of freestyle, other strokes, kicking,
and pulling—is the key to effectively preparing for the IM.
Preparing IM Specialists for Success
our program’s first olympian, Karen La Berge, made the 1980 olympic
trials. She qualified second in prelims to tracy caulkins in the 400 IM
311

--- Page 326 Text ---
Shoulberg
with a six-second improvement over her lifetime best and was preparing
for the finals that evening. She warmed up with only fartlek training, a
method we still use today that has the athlete count either strokes—18
strokes technique work, 12 strokes build up, and 6 strokes race pace—or
distance—75 meters technique, 50 meters buildup, and 25 meters race.
this warm-up helps the athlete change speeds and work on transitional
turns, fast stroke patterns, and technical stroke patterns until he or she
feels ready to race.
after her warm-up, I brought Karen a popsicle, and we sat down and
talked about the race. I think I was more nervous than she was! I told
her to float the fly and be in eighth place, build the backstroke, build the
breaststroke, and race the freestyle. She dropped another 1.5 seconds and
in one day bettered her time over eight seconds—and made the team.
It wasn’t just the popsicle that did it; the training prepared her for this
breakthrough!
two examples of sets we used to prepare Karen for the trials are a
broken 7,000 yards in 70 minutes—8  100 on :59; 1  800 on 8:08; 7
 100 on :59; and 1  700 on 7:07—and a 10  1,000 freestyle on 10:20.
In the latter set, she failed at #8 and so rested an extra 30 seconds, then
repeated #8, and #9 and #10 were her fastest. her mental toughness,
desire to compete every day, desire to maintain a high level of fitness,
and willingness to take care of her body through proper conditioning,
bed rest, nutrition, and hydration were exceptional.
polly winde Surhoff made the world championships in 1982. She
came out of Murray Steven’s age-group program in north Baltimore.
She was primarily a breaststroker, and she was a great one. Murray had
done a great job of teaching strokes to her. that year she was second
to tracy caulkins in the 400 IM short course and went on to make the
world championships, where she passed Sippy woodhead, the former
american record-holder, with 20 meters to go. I think the reason was
that Sippy had to expend so much energy in her breaststroke that polly
was able to go past with easy speed and then race the freestyle. and,
again, there is a fatigue factor in the IM for swimmers who do not train
all four strokes on a regular basis. the following summer polly made
the pan-am Games in the 400 IM.
In the fall of 1983 Sue heon took a leave of absence from the Univer-
sity of pittsburgh, where she would have been a senior, and began her
training at Germantown academy. Sue was, in my opinion, a natural
backstroker and a strong middle-distance and distance freestyler. to this
day, I think my butterfly is better than hers, and mine was never good!
her breaststroke was good. her intensive training, at the pool and away
312

--- Page 327 Text ---
Individual Medley Training
from the pool, over those 11 months was incredible. I will give you an
example of one particular day that I will never forget.
we rent lanes from the old philadelphia aquatic club, now called
the pennypacker club (Germantown did not—and still doesn’t—have a
long-course pool). the pennypacker club pool is 55 yards (about 50.3
meters), eight lanes. I told the athletes two weeks in advance that the
second Sunday in May was a mandatory meet at pennypacker. there
would be a 400 warm-up and then a 15,000 meters for time. I wanted
polly to do a lot of backstroke, so I changed the times for her; I wanted
Karen to mix her strokes; and I wanted Sue to swim 7,500 freestyle (since
it was so close to the trials—about five weeks out). Sue decided that she
would go an even pace. her first 100 meters was a 1:10. her next 74 were
all 1:10. She turned to do an additional 100 and one of my former as-
sistant coaches, chris Martin, went over to stop her. She swam another
100, then another 100, and I told chris to let her go. She completed the
15,000, and every 100 was exactly 1:10.
that swim gave Sue so much confidence that at the olympic trials,
with a little more that 75 meters to go, she turned on the afterburners
and came home in a 31.0 for the last 50 freestyle, bringing her best time
from a 4:53.8 to 4:46.1. She made the olympic team. In her mind, the
May race put her on that team. In my mind, making the team was a cul-
mination of all the different training she had done that year. that race
taught me a lot about the value of having the mind ready the day of the
meet. at the olympic training camp she was told not to do that type of
long training; at the olympics she qualified second in the morning but
ended up fourth at night. I think Sue should have been able to continue
the type of training she was used to doing with our team all through
the olympic training camp. I also think that it helped for her to have
kids around her, her teammates at Germantown—erica hansen, Kathy
hettche, Jeff prior, Dave wharton, peter Boden, and trina radke—in May
of 1984 who were also willing to do that kind of training. erica hansen,
one of the greatest talents I ever trained, went on to make the 1988 and
1992 teams in the 400 IM.
Jeff prior was my second great male IM swimmer (the first was chuck
Bauman, a graduate of Southern Methodist University). Jeff was the
gold medalist in the 400 IM at the 1985 world University Games and at
the pan-pacs. after Jeff came a young man named David wharton, who
was asked years later, “who helped you the most in your training?” he
said that it wasn’t a coach; that it was Karen, polly, and Sue who told
him to stick with it, to listen to his coach and assistant coaches, and to
train fast. he went on to break two world records and to represent the
313

--- Page 328 Text ---
Shoulberg
United States for six consecutive years at the highest level. he won gold
at nationals and at the pan-pacifics, won seven ncaa titles for USc,
and still holds the american record in the 200 IM. he is by far the most
competitive male athlete I have ever coached.
I sat Dave down in the fall of 1985 and told him that I had learned a
lot from Sue heon’s 15,000 race and that I wanted to see how mentally
tough he was. I challenged him to a 16,000 IM for time ([250 fly, 250
back, 250 breast, 250 free]  16) . after 9,000 meters, Dave swam 100
meters of backstroke and stuck his head out of the water and said that
he had miscounted freestyle in the race. I knew then that I had one of
the greatest and rarest male swimmers in the United States—a thinking
swimmer! we used the same type of swim in preparation for the world
championship trials but pared down the distance each week: 13,000,
then 10,000, 7,000, 4,000, and finally 1,000 just a few days out from the
trials. at those trials Dave, a junior in high school, passed Jeff Kostoff in
the last 25 meters (just as polly winde Surhoff had passed Sippy wood-
head in 1982) to establish a new american record in the 400 IM.
the next summer at the pan-pacific trials, our national championships,
Dave set another new american record. we went to Brisbane for the
pan-pac meet, and he qualified second in the prelims behind the great
alex Bauman, 1984 gold medalist and world-record holder. Dave was
disappointed with his swim and informed me that he didn’t know how
to race well on foreign soil. I told him that either I could ask the FIna
officials if the 400 IM in the fall could be swum in the United States or
he could pick it up and swim fast in Brisbane! he responded by focus-
ing on his technique and race strategy, breaking the world record by
over two seconds. he did so by negative splitting each stroke’s 100. his
transitional turns were flawless; every time I show the videotape to my
team, I get chills. the following night he dropped almost two seconds
in the 200 IM and won. he received the “outstanding Swimmer of the
Meet” award.
one girl in our age-group program really started to shine in the sum-
mer of 1997. Maddy crippen dropped seven seconds at the 1997 world
championship trials and went 4:40 in the 400 IM, second to Kristine
Quance. I would have to say that Maddy is the toughest IM trainer and
all-around natural athlete I have ever coached, holding personal bests
of 2:11 in the 200-meter fly, 2:16 in the 200-meter back, 2:29 in the 200-
meter breast, 4:43 in the 500-yard freestyle, 4:40 in the 400-meter IM,
and 2:15 in the 200-meter IM. She doesn’t have innate speed except in
breaststroke. what she has is the ability to combine the four strokes to
achieve success. tables 22.1 through 22.3 show some of the workouts
314

--- Page 329 Text ---
Individual Medley Training
Maddy used to train for the IM.
I am very fortunate that my former athletes not only swam fast but
typically stayed on to receive postgraduate degrees and still give back
to the sport today. as I have said again and again to my wife, Molly, I
am the luckiest guy in the world because I get to coach kids.
I love it when coaches spend a day or two on our deck and interact
with my athletes; I learn something every time they come. I will tell you
a short story about one coach who came to visit. after observing three
practices this coach pronounced our training methods “bull.” he then
took some of the sets back to his team, and they swam real fast! So ap-
parently the bull didn’t hurt his team.
Summary
• never allow athletes to specialize in one stroke at a young age.
Table 22.1
Sample Morning Workout
Set Stroke Pace
32:00 16 m hopblock, lunges Dryland
16  50 on :40, 25 rpm* backstroke 1:20
3  600 on 7:45 hipbelt** /paddles backstroke 1:18
1  2,000 on 25:15; 1,000 paddles, 1,000 fly butterfly 1:16
8  100 on 1:45 head-high waterbug breaststroke 1:45
18  25 on 1:30 power rack Power rack 6:00
Total: 5,850 yards
Stroke categories Yards Percent
backstroke 2,600 44.44
breaststroke 800 13.68
butterfly 2,000 34.19
Power rack 450 7.69
* rpm is a spin or turnover drill. I refer to it as “rpm” because the athletes sit high in the water, have a fast
turnover and their legs are always driving the whole way.
** A hipbelt is a belt the athletes wear that helps with correct hip rotation. I used it every day for about 18
minutes with Maddy Crippen for 10 months prior to the Olympic Trials. We basically only use hipbelts for
backstroke or freestyle.
315

--- Page 330 Text ---
Shoulberg
Table 22.2
Sample Afternoon Workout
Set Stroke Pace
16  75 on 1:05 2-stroke IM Individual medley 1:27
3  (3 300 on 4:05) 1 = pull buoy, paddles/tube 100 backstroke, 1:22
2 = paddles/tube 200 freestyle
3 = paddles/tube
3  400 on 6:05 fast kicking Kicking 1:31
3  (1  150 on 2:10; 50 race, 50 technique, 50 race) Freestyle 1:27
3  (1  150 on 1:55; 25 technique, 25 race) Freestyle 1:17
3  (1  150 on 1:35 race) Freestyle 1:03
3  800 on 9:55 backstroke 1:14
75:00 Dryland training
Total: 8,850 yards
Stroke categories Yards Percent
Freestyle 3,150 35.29
backstroke 3,300 37.29
Individual medley 1,200 13.56
Kicking 1,200 13.56
316

--- Page 331 Text ---
Individual Medley Training
Table 22.3
Sample Saturday Workout
Set Stroke Pace
12  (1  30 on :30 turn) Freestyle 1:40
(1  25 on :20 turn) Freestyle
1:20 (1  20 on
:25 race finish IM order) Individual medley 2:05
3  300 on 4:30 hipbelt* or drill backstroke 1:30
4  (1  600 on 7:15 free zoomers, must Freestyle 1:13
negative split)
(1  300 on 5:15 zoomer paddles, 25 breaststroke 1:45
breast, kick, pull, race)
(1  200 on 2:45; 25 rpm high, 50 stroke, backstroke 1:23
25 zoomers and paddles)
6  500 on 7:55 1/2 mix IM 3 = 400 IM (race) Individual medley 1:23
100 float
16  25 on :20 free Freestyle 1:20
12  150 on 2:25 50 technique, drill, race Freestyle 1:37
12  125 on 1:45 odd = rev IM; even = normal IM Individual medley 1:24
Total: 12,900 yards
Stroke categories Yards Percent
Freestyle 5,260 40.78
backstroke 1,700 13.18
breaststroke 1,200 9.30
Individual medley 4,740 36.74
* A hipbelt is a belt the athletes wear that helps with correct hip rotation.
317

--- Page 332 Text ---
Shoulberg
• working four strokes each day lessens the fatigue factor in train-
ing.
• Maintain training records from year to year and analyze them for
possible changes.
• the IM teaches pace, race strategy, conditioning, and transitional
turns.
• train to the longest IM race available in your swim classification.
• negative split the 100 leg of the last three strokes in the 400 IM and
the fly if you can.
• race to be out front going into the freestyle leg.
• you must pay the price of intensive training to be successful in the
IM.
318

--- Page 333 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e n t y - t h r e e
Relay Training
David Marsh

--- Page 334 Text ---
Marsh
the most overlooked and arguably the most enjoyable racing events in
the sport of swimming are the relays. My heart still jumps with excite-
ment when I recall an ncaa championship relay team made up of
relative unknowns Michael Bartz, adam Jerger, John hargis, and Brett
hawke in lane two outtouching the 1997 medley relay field and record-
ing the fastest time in history. More important than the record was the
fact that this relay catapulted the auburn tigers to our first ever ncaa
team championship.
another all-time favorite memory of mine involves the relay team
made up of Katie ryan, Brook Monroe, Mimi Bowen, and Katie taylor,
none of whom had ever been on a USa national team at any level. at
the 1999 Southeastern conference (Sec) championships, this team
broke the american record in the 200 medley relay. their relay eclipsed
a time that had been set by a Stanford relay team featuring three USa
Olympians. In the television interview following the race, freestyler Katie
taylor was asked if they had been going for the record. She responded,
“I had no idea or concern about any record; I just wanted to touch the
wall before Georgia did!”
throughout the recent history of swimming it seems that many of the
most heroic performances have occurred when four swimmers combined
to perform well beyond the expected limits of four individual swim-
mers. perhaps the best example is from the 1976 Olympics when the
USa 400 freestyle relay team made up of Kim peyton, wendy Boglioli,
Jill Sterkel, and Shirley Babashoff dug down deep to end the swimming
events with an enormous upset of the east German women’s team, who
were known to have achieved dominance in the sport through the use
of performance-enhancing drugs.
In this chapter, I outline some of the key areas we focus on at auburn
University when we prepare for relay racing. I explain the strategies
and methods we use to improve starting and finishing technique, then
discuss the decisions coaches face in selecting relay participants and
in determining the best relay order. the following takeoff and finishing
recommendations apply to all relay events (all distances).
The Relay Finish
the most vital ingredient in consistent, successful relay exchanges is
the proper finish of each leg. Swimmers can and must learn how to fin-
ish the final stroke with a full extension through the fingertips while
maintaining a consistent rhythmic tempo. Short stroking or gliding into
the finish will “hamstring” the relay swimmer on the blocks.
320

--- Page 335 Text ---
Relay Training
there are a couple of strategies we use to develop and improve the
finish. while we use these drills specifically to prepare for relays, these
are good drills for nonrelay swimmers as well.
1. practice finishes at the midpool area where there is no wall to serve
as a distraction. By doing midpool finishes, swimmers can focus
on extension skills. whatever the stroke swimmers come into the
finish with, there should be no excessive up or down movements
of the arms, hands, or body as they approach the wall. the focus
should be on “that spot” three to six inches under the surface in the
center of the touch pad (or wall) where the fingertips will touch.
2. have swimmers learn to adjust their stroke length by slightly
shortening or lengthening strokes on the last three cycles into the
wall during practice. Make sure that athletes learn to adjust their
strokes at a variety of speeds. as with most skills, they should try
to perfect movement patterns at slower speeds, then increase to
race speed. have swimmers learn to adjust strokes using equip-
ment such as fins and paddles.
The Start Off the Block
the best relay swimmers gain an advantage by using a whole-body surg-
ing movement off the block, one of the most athletic moves involved in
the sport of swimming. the complex movement involved in the start
encompasses explosive jumping, timing, acceleration, streamlining,
body stabilization, and flexibility. at the age-group level the start can
be performed with merely an accelerating arm swing. at the senior and
elite levels, athletes should shift the whole body, including the feet,
forward as they perform the full accelerating arm swing that is known
as “the launch.”
to help swimmers understand the advantage of using the type of mo-
mentum gained in a launch, have them practice vertical jumps. Find a
tall brick wall and have them stand next to it. First, have the swimmers
raise their hands over their heads and jump as high as possible. Mark
the spot. then, have them jump up and touch the wall using a full arm
swing, and mark that spot. Finally have them approach with one or
two steps on the block before they jump. this helps enhance the arm
swing. the progression in vertical distance will be obvious. now have
the swimmers imagine gaining the three to twelve inches they acquired
with the arm swing in a tightly contested race!
here are several tips swimmers can use to maximize their block de-
parture.
321

--- Page 336 Text ---
Marsh
1. Swimmers can perfect the timing of the arm swing by standing on
the deck first, then taking the arm swing from a vertical jump to a
horizontal leap (into the water).
2. have swimmers learn relay start skills solo at first rather than hav-
ing a swimmer performing a finish to cue them.
3. Swimmers can practice vertical power progression jumps with arm
swings off the blocks for maximum height, then go for horizontal
distance.
• Movement should include a streamlined, feet-first entry into the
pool to show control.
• Swimmers should increase the body lean on jumps and eventu-
ally perform controlled pike dives, entering the water with no
splash.
• Swimmers should increase the body lean to regular dive posi-
tion. Ideally the hamstring and calf should be at approximately
a 90-degree angle, and the body should be almost parallel to the
water before the final explosive movement with the legs.
• to add one or two step-ups to further develop a feel for explod-
ing off the blocks, have swimmers start again with vertical
leaps—jumping up as high as possible from the deck, and then
from the block, and progressing to the “running launch.”
Entry Through Breakout
as important as the explosive departure from the blocks is the proper
alignment of the body on entry. a smooth “no-splash” entry that car-
ries an unassisted streamlined glide as far as possible is a great starting
point. Keep in mind that the speed at which a relay swimmer comes
into contact with the water is the fastest a swimmer will ever travel in
the water; therefore, maximizing the efficiency of the above to below
the surface transition is critical.
after the entry, a smooth transition from below to on the surface should
be accomplished with a subtle, whole-body shift rather than more dra-
matic hand, head, or arm shifts. Breaststroke and butterfly swimmers
(and freestylers who use butterfly kickouts) will make this whole-body
adjustment at the point where the feet submerge to establish optimal
pullout or kickout position. Freestylers who do not use butterfly kickouts
will make the subtle adjustment as the knees submerge.
the typical breakout time for a swimmer of a relay start should be .2
to .5 seconds slower than a flat start. this is because the running start
322

--- Page 337 Text ---
Relay Training
takes the swimmer farther out than a flat start; thus the swimmer is un-
derwater longer. the distance gained from using a relay start over a flat
start should be between six inches and a full yard.
Timing the Exchange
Only after the start is developed should a swimmer be concerned with
timing a relay start off an incoming swimmer. the following exchange
strategy is one that legendary auburn track coach Mel rosen used in
bringing together the 1992 USa Olympic track sprinters. he had the
athletes practice the majority of relay starts at a 50 percent effort level,
focusing on rhythm and timing. Only after several smooth exchanges at
this speed would he have the runners attempt an explosive exchange.
Initially swimmers should practice “safe” relay takeoffs emphasizing
the incoming swimmer’s finish technique, then the starting swimmer’s
launch and breakout. a differential of .1 to .2 seconds from the time the
finishing swimmer’s fingertips touch to the time the starting athlete’s foot
leaves the block is good for developing safe but fast relay exchanges. If the
swimmer on the block waits to begin the arm motion until the swimmer
in the water has begun the last arm stroke, the start should be safe.
to reduce the differential between the finisher’s touch and the starter’s
launch, the swimmer on the block needs to learn to read the finisher.
If the swimmer in the water has a stroke with a high tempo, he or she
will typically end somewhat choppy and short, whereas a swimmer
with excellent distance per stroke will typically have a long extension.
a swimmer’s finishing style needs to be consistent to allow the team to
gain the competitive advantage in a close relay race. the athlete on the
block must be able to trust the swimmer in the water.
here are some tips for improving relay start timing:
1. have a relay swimmer stand above the lane while each swim-
mer finishes. the athlete can become familiar with a particular
swimmer’s finishing tendencies just by observing.
2. Use a video camera to record practice and meet exchanges. View-
ing an exchange that is a jump on videotape in slow motion will
make such an exchange more obvious when it occurs live at full
speed.
3. a swimmer will develop a good feel for whether a fast, medium,
or slow start is called for through trial and error. Obviously, the
swimmer cannot develop a feel if the coach does all the immediate
evaluating. with practice, the swimmer should develop a sense of
timing for a relay exchange.
323

--- Page 338 Text ---
Marsh
Coaching Decisions
My first assignment as the head coach of a USa national team was in 1995
for the pan-pacific team in the newly completed Georgia tech Olympic
pool. this experience turned out to be a lesson in relay strategy for me.
the meet’s last event was the 400 freestyle relay, and expectations were
high as Gary hall Jr. was having a tremendous meet having split a sizzling
47.95 on the 400 medley relay. In our final team meeting I announced
the relay order: Gary hall, Joe hudepohl, John Olsen, and David Fox. I
was sure that this team would give us an insurmountable lead after the
second leg and would ensure victory over the australians in the final
event of the meet. the veteran relay members respectfully approached
me with an alternative relay order to consider. their thoughts were that
that David had traditionally been an excellent lead-off swimmer and
that Gary, always at his best when the lights were brightest, should take
the anchor leg. their input proved to be 100 percent correct. the relay
team went on to set the only world record of the competition; the key
legs were David’s leadoff and Gary’s anchor.
On my teams, I have always tried to make relay participation an honor;
great relay splits garner as much or more acknowledgement as individual
swims. the first consideration in deciding who swims on a particular
relay is the goal of the relay. yes, the goal is usually to win, but by how
much? the best relay entries may not always be the fastest four swimmers
available. For example, to ensure a win in the final relay of the meet, it
may be necessary to save the four fastest swimmers and to take a bit of
a chance on winning the first relay by using some swimmers who are
slightly slower but who could win anyway. On the other hand if the meet
has already been won, it might make sense to use slower swimmers in the
final relay so that more swimmers have a chance to excel. why not offer
other swimmers the chance to prove themselves in a relay position? the
goal may not always be to win; it could be to reward some hardworking
swimmers with the chance to compete or to increase the team depth on
relays by providing relay experience to more swimmers.
when coaching age-group level swimmers, I have always tried to use
as much objective data as possible (i.e., putting together the best times
from individual events) in determining participants for a relay. at the
more elite level, there are certain swimmers who seem to have an innate
ability to consistently swim at phenomenal levels on relays, in season
and throughout taper. a few of auburn’s such relay experts were rowdy
Gaines, Dave Mccagg, per Johansson, Greg Schmid, yoav Bruck, nick
Shackell, adam Jerger, annie Lett, Sandy McIntyre, Keri reynolds, Katie
324

--- Page 339 Text ---
Relay Training
taylor, Brett hawke, and John hargis. I can picture each one of these
athletes running down or outtouching their competitors in relay situa-
tions, generally extending themselves well beyond their performance
in their individual races.
as the saying goes, “when you’re hot, you’re hot!” never in our sport
is this phrase more true than in championship meets. My first inclina-
tion is to select the swimmer who seems to be “hottest”—swimming
fastest—at that time. at the 2000 women’s ncaa championships, junior
Brook Monroe found herself on her first collegiate 400 freestyle relay
while more experienced and historically much faster 100 freestylers
watched from the bleachers. Brook was having a great meet; despite
being a breaststroke specialist and despite having a two-beat freestyle
kick, she was able to give us the 55.6 relay split that secured a top-five
ncaa team finish. I also encourage my swimmers to express their de-
sire to be on the relay. a simple “I am ready if you need me coach” is
always appreciated.
having determined the goal of the relay and which swimmers seem
to be “on” or “up” for a particular relay, it’s time to consider the relay
order. the following factors should be taken into account:
1. Goal of the relay. a goal of performing the fastest time possible
usually dictates a fastest to slowest order, to use the calm-water
advantage.
2. psychological makeup of relay team members. the first and fourth
slots are for pressure performers.
3. type of pool and type of competition. For example, if it’s a slow
pool, the team must be able to quickly get out front.
4. types of competition. end of season, championship, and season
meets call for different strategies.
5. Familiarity with relay exchanges. the bigger the meet, the more
important it is that the swimmers be familiar with relay team
members’ tendencies.
If there is any question about whom to select for a relay spot, I consider
who wants the pressure, who has historically performed well under
similar conditions, and who has “easy speed.” Finally, I pick someone
I can trust to have a quality takeoff and finish.
the beauty of relays is evident when the tV cameras capture three
swimmers gathered around the starting block using whatever air they
can capture to cheer home their anchor leg swimmer, then embracing
in celebration of the extra points earned toward a championship title or
325

--- Page 340 Text ---
Marsh
gold medal. equally exciting and remarkably similar is the relay scene
down at the neighborhood pool, in which the age-groupers vie for blue
ribbons with stickers on the back noting the winning time. that shared
enthusiasm is what relay racing is all about.
Summary
• Successful relay exchanges depend on a good finish by the swimmer
of each leg.
• the start involves explosive jumping, timing, acceleration, stream-
lining, body stabilization, and flexibility.
• Swimmers should perfect the timing of the arm swing in the relay
start by practicing on the deck first.
• Swimmers should practice vertical jumps with arm swings off the
blocks for maximum height, then distance.
• entry into the water must be streamlined and should produce little
or no splash.
• have swimmers practice “safe” relay exchanges with the focus on
finish, launch, and breakout before emphasizing time.
• have swimmers practice relay exchanges by watching the finish
only at first—no launch.
• Use a video camera to help critique relay starts and finishes.
• Swimmers must develop their own feel and confidence for relay
starts.
• relay swimmers may have valuable input into the order of the re-
lay.
• Knowing who wants the pressure is important in making relay deci-
sions.
326

--- Page 341 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e n t y - f o u r
Power Training
randy reese

--- Page 342 Text ---
R. Reese
power is an important part of conditioning for swimmers of all strokes,
but especially for those who swim breaststroke and butterfly sprint
events. In those strokes there is a pull, executed by using both arms
simultaneously, followed by a recovery period during which the hands
are not in the water and the swimmer’s forward motion relies on the
pull from the previous stroke. this is in direct contrast to the freestyle
and the backstroke, in which one hand is always in the water produc-
ing a pulling effect. the breaststroke and butterfly strokes also require
the swimmer to pull up and out of the water to breathe; thus there is an
even greater need for a powerful forward motion.
the textbook definition of power is strength times speed. It is rela-
tively easy to increase strength in traditional dryland training by using
a combination of weight training and exercises that use the swimmer’s
own body weight. Speed, on the other hand is more a matter of condi-
tioning the nervous system to fire nerve impulses at a more rapid rate.
Maximum speed cannot be achieved as long as there is muscular tension;
tension in the muscles is like static in a telephone line that prevents
clear reception. Muscle tension does not allow a clean signal for a rapid
contraction of the muscle. once swimmers have increased their muscular
strength and improved their muscular relaxation to get maximum speed,
theoretically they have gained power.
Most people think of strength work as something a swimmer does out
of the pool. the problem with such training is how to take this power
into the water and condition it into useable, specific speed for swim-
ming. there is a surefire way to rapidly develop strength and muscular
power endurance with swim-specific training, however, using a system
of pulleys and baskets. the remainder of this chapter is devoted to a
description of my own pulley and basket training.
the pulley system our athletes use is designed to maximize their
strength and endurance as well as their stroke-specific feel for the wa-
ter as they train. Swimmers are attached to the system by a belt worn
around the waist. the belt is attached to ropes, which are fed through
a pulley system and are attached to weights. the weights increase re-
sistance in the swimmers’ motion as they move through the water. the
weights are placed in sturdy milk baskets or wire baskets that can be
specifically made; alternatively the weights can be attached to a chain
that runs through the hole in the middle of the circular weight and that
is snapped to the pulley. the baskets are hung from the ropes, allowing
for maximum use of the pulley system in each lane. usually two swim-
mers per lane are attached to baskets. the simple construction of this
device can be accomplished with some basic materials that are readily
available at any hardware store (see figure 24.1, a and b).
328

--- Page 343 Text ---
Power Training
Figure 24.1a
Front view of the
pulley and basket
system. The cable
can be let down
to work on the
pulleys and ropes
and to adjust the
pulleys to line up
with each lane. I
use a rope length
on the pulley bas-
ket of 150 feet;
this makes it pos-
sible to swim 75
feet (a two-to-one
ratio).
Figure 24.1b Side view of the pulley and
basket system. The end of the rope not at-
tached to the cable angles down over the
deck to edge of pool.
329

--- OCR from Page 343 Image 1 ---
40 feet
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

Ee, Eee

Rope

Figure 24.1b Side view of th
basket system. The end of the
tached to the cable angles do
deck to edge of pool.

Fool

--- OCR from Page 343 Image 2 ---
Pal
ae aN“ Tie rope to cable
fa

_
Cable extends across

length of pool bo

Cable identical 40-foot pole.

40 feet

Crank
ra

Weights

Pulleys

Balke wort
bey Svininers
—

--- Page 344 Text ---
R. Reese
using pulleys and baskets to aid in training swimmers has been done
since the late 1970s. although this technique has not been used exten-
sively, it has produced significant improvement in both age-group and
senior swimmers (see table 24.1). there is a certain novelty involved in
being attached to a weight system in the water, and swimmers seem to
like these workouts.
I have found that the greatest conditioning benefit for swimmers can be
achieved by using the basket system on Monday, wednesday, and friday
during the high yardage part of the season. It is beneficial, I believe, to
give swimmers at least a day’s rest between basket workouts to allow the
body to recover. Most of my team, which includes age-group and senior
swimmers, focuses on muscular endurance for two basket workouts a
week (Monday and friday), and focuses on strength development using
the baskets once a week (wednesday). Most sprint-specific swimmers,
however, should switch the focus on Monday and friday to strength
development and on wednesdays to muscular endurance.
Building Muscular Endurance
Table 24.1
Swimmer Improvements With Pulleys and Baskets
Time
training
Event with Previous Improved
Swimmer Age (m) pulleys best
time Improvement
Tommy 20 100 4 months 54.9 52.8 3.8%
Hannon fly
Nate 21 200 4 months 1:51.0 1:48.9 1.9%
Dursing free
Jamie 21 200 4 months 1:50.7 1:48.6 1.9%
Rousch free
andrea 14 100 11 months 1:06.0 1:01.3 7.1%
axtell fly (unshaved)
andrea 14 200 11 months 2:28.0 2:15.1 8.7%
axtell fly
lexi 14 200 11 months 2:49.0 2:37.7 6.7%
Spann breast
330

--- Page 345 Text ---
Power Training
Developing muscular endurance enhances the swimmer’s ability to
maintain a consistent rate of speed over a long period of time. to build
this endurance with baskets, our athletes swim a total of 4,500 to 5,000
yards with short rest interval sets of 100s and up using light weights.
Swimmers who have used the basket training device for several weeks
show the same muscular endurance conditioning level as individuals
who have used regular pull, kick, and swim drills for two months. Swim-
mers notice much quicker improvements in the water with the pulley
and basket system than with typical dryland weight training. I think the
biggest reason for this is that swimmers must maintain good technique
to pull the weight up in the water, whereas swimmers who are working
on a swim bench or using surgical tubing to simulate strokes on dry land
do not need to use exact stroke technique to move the resistance.
Some coaches have also tried building muscular endurance by taking
surgical tubing and using it in the pool. tubing can be used to partially
simulate work done with baskets. however, the problem with using sur-
gical tubing is that, in the beginning, the resistance provided is usually
too easy for the swimmers. Because of this, the swimmers using surgical
tubing take only a few strokes in which they exert the correct amount
of pressure; after that the pressure becomes too great and the swimmers
cannot continue moving forward. this completely changes the stroke
technique; too much pressure alters technique in a negative way. If the
swimmers use surgical tubing instead of baskets, I recommend that they
stop and turn around as soon as their forward progress is stopped. this
will prevent them from developing bad stroke technique.
Strength Building
raw strength is necessary for explosive speed in sprinting. Strength
building sets should use heavier weights in the baskets and should be
shorter sets than those used for building muscular endurance. I help
swimmers determine the proper weight through trial and error.
on strength days, we generally keep the total yardage of basket sets to
under 3,000 yards, and sets consist of intervals of 100 yards and under.
using fins and paddles enables swimmers to increase resistance to make
the set a more strength-producing exercise.
Pulley and Basket Workouts
During the drills that follow, regardless of the strokes being practiced,
331

--- Page 346 Text ---
R. Reese
swimmers can swim back very fast with weights and create a towing
effect. this is a good training method to enhance the swimmers’ feel of
going fast in the water and awareness of the magnification of resistance
produced by nonstreamlined movements in the water. another option
is for swimmers to float back or swim easy to help them recover for
the next resistance lap. Most swim sets are 400 or under for freestyle,
backstroke, and breaststroke. Sets of 100 or under are more appropri-
ate for butterfly unless the swimmers are using a triple or double kick.
the reason for this is that it is very difficult to maintain good butterfly
technique on longer swims. the following are drills that can be used
with particular strokes, examples of strength workouts, and examples
of muscular workouts.
Freestyle Basket Drills
using fins and paddles with most of these drills is also an option.
• touch and pull (catch up). the swimmer swims one-arm freestyle.
the arm that is not used to pull is either held at the side or extended
in front.
• freestyle kick with board
• Kick with thumbs locked, head out
Backstroke Drills
• Single-arm pull with arm not being used held at the side
• Double-arm pull
• Spin drill
• Kicking on back with arms locked overhead
• Kicking on back with arms at sides
Breaststroke Drills
• Breaststroke pull with dolphin kick. one stroke up on surface of
water, three strokes underwater (one stroke per kick).
• head-out breaststroke pull with freestyle kick
• Breaststroke kick with arms at sides
• Breaststroke kick on back with arms at sides
• Breaststroke kick with a board
• Breaststroke pull with a pull buoy
332

--- Page 347 Text ---
Power Training
Butterfly Drills
• triple-kick butterfly
• Double-kick butterfly
• Kicking drills on side with bottom arm out in front and top arm at
side
• Kicking butterfly on back with arms locked overhead
• Kicking butterfly on back with arms at sides
• Kicking with a board
• Butterfly pull with a pull buoy
Strength Workouts
4  100 pulley stroke drill on 2:00
6  50 pulley stroke drill on 1:15
1  200 pulley stroke drill on 3:30
3  (1  100 pulley kick with fins on 2:15 and 2  50 pulley kick on
1:15)
4  50 stroke drill on 1:00
5  100 pulley swim on 2:00
1  200 stroke drill on 3:30
2  (2  100 pulley swim with fins on 1:45 and 2  50 swim with
fins on 1:15)
4  50 stroke drill on 1:00
10  50 pulley swim with fins and paddles on 1:30
Muscle Endurance Workouts
1  400 pulley stroke drill, 1:30 rest
2  200 pulley stroke drill, 1:00 rest
3  300 pulley swim, 1:00 rest
8  100 pulley kick with fins on 1:45
1  1,000 pulley swim with fins, 2:00 rest
2  400 pulley swim with fins and paddles, 1:30 rest
2  200 swim with fins and paddles, 1:00 rest
Summary
• power is strength times speed.
333

--- Page 348 Text ---
R. Reese
• Dryland training is the main method of developing strength.
• Improve speed in the water by using resistance in the pool.
• the pulley and basket system rapidly develops muscular endur-
ance.
• the weights inside the baskets in the pulley system increase the
resistance and the challenge encountered in the training.
• the pulley system requires and encourages good technique.
• Surgical tubing swims can improve water power.
• Strength training should be done with heavy weights in the bas-
ket.
• fins and paddles can be used to increase resistance in the power
drills.
334

--- Page 349 Text ---
c h a p t e r t w e n t y - f i v e
Preparing to
Excel in
Competition
Don Gambril

--- Page 350 Text ---
Gambril
Swimming is, without a doubt, one of the most demanding sports in
the world considering the number of years, hours per day, weeks, and
months involved for coaches and athletes. Most of today’s world-class
swimmers have 10 or more years invested in training—and what training!
not many other sports require an athlete to train twice daily for a total
of 10 to 12 sport-specific workouts per week and to endure extensive
flexibility training and strength conditioning. Getting swimmers to get
in the pool in and of itself can be a very stressful endeavor. Often the
challenge for the coach is to get his or her swimmers in the pool to start
practice without losing patience.
it only makes sense that the most important goal of the team is to
swim the best possible times in competition and to get the very highest
marks in the most important meets of the season. perhaps the greatest
measure of a coach’s career is how well his or her athletes performed in
the championship meets, when it counted. Many coaches, having been
inducted into their respective sport’s hall of fame, are still tortured by
the fact that they never won the Super Bowl, the world Series, or the
Stanley cup.
how then does a swim coach approach this most important accom-
plishment? i will attempt to answer this based on the experience that i
have had over 40 years of coaching swimmers. My experience has been
acquired as coach of novice teams and age groupers in countywide
competitions; of high school, junior college and Division i collegiate
teams; and of national teams at the pan-american Games, pan-pacific
Games, world championships, Goodwill Games, and other competi-
tions, including five Olympic Games—once as head men’s and women’s
coach and four times as an assistant. Just imagine having the experience
of assisting George haines, peter Daland, and Doc counsilman before
becoming head coach of a US Olympic team. needless to say, having
worked with them gave me a lot of confidence.
it isn’t easy for an old coach reminiscing about his greatest moments
and trying to decide exactly what was the reason for his success to draw
a detailed conclusion. perhaps, after reading this chapter, you will be
able to draw your own conclusion. while it may not be possible to create
one guaranteed, detailed list for success, i do have thoughts and feelings
about what’s important in preparing for success and excelling in com-
petition. Let’s see if i can list some of these for you. My list, i am sure,
does not contain all of the elements of success, but a program built on
this foundation would, with hard work, yield good results. Looking back
over the five decades in which i have been involved in swim coaching,
i find that the following items come to mind when i attempt to identify
the elements of success in swim competition:
336

--- Page 351 Text ---
Preparing to Excel in Competition
• having confidence in oneself
• Making, believing in, and dedicatedly following a plan but not be-
ing afraid to adjust as needed
• Being a motivator
• Setting the example and being consistent
the final cornerstone for success is putting in the necessary hard work
and evaluating that work honestly.
Having Self-Confidence
the most important element of success, probably, is confidence in one-
self and in the program you are delivering. forbes carlile, the famous
australian swimming coach, has a sign at his ryde Swim School that
says something like, “we strive to develop an environment from which
champions evolve.” this statement really says it all. the level of com-
petition in practice, the talent in the pool, the work ethic in the group,
the belief in the program, and the coach define the level the team can
reach. the workout that the coach delivers in the daily practice is only
as important as the confidence the coach shows in his or her program
and in the swimmers’ abilities as well as the way the coach motivates
the team to do the workout. the end result will be directly proportional
to the effort the swimmers put out. therefore the successful coach must
get the swimmer to put forth the effort required.
in my first 15 years of coaching our teams won 13 league champion-
ships. as i look back, i can see that our attitude from the beginning was
that we were going to win. there are lots of things that allowed us to
have that attitude along the way. perhaps by giving you the following
examples i can convey the importance of both the athlete and the coach
having confidence. Keep in mind that hard work must be the foundation
of this confidence. without that basic component, all the confidence in
the world will not deliver the results for which a team strives.
i believe the fact that we were among the first, if not the first, high
school program to shave our athletes for competition gave us a huge
advantage. Back in 1960, i did my master’s thesis on improving swim
times by shaving. while we were reaping the benefit of shaved perfor-
mances, others scoffed. it wasn’t long, however, before everyone was
shaving and enjoying that same advantage. confidence was a big part of
our success. we expected to have huge improvements in the champion-
ships and in big dual meets, and we did. having established confidence
in our program, our swimmers took it for granted.
in the 1963 long-course nationals, the water temperature in the pool
337

--- Page 352 Text ---
Gambril
was in the high 80s (f). this had a much stronger effect on the distance
swimmers than on those who swam the shorter events. the women in
the 1500-meter event were about 20 seconds over their entry times across
the board. we had a young 12-year-old on our team, patty caretto, who
actually improved her entry time in this event by 20 seconds, from 20:20
to 20:00. i give you this information just as a reference.
the next year we were in pittsburgh for the indoor national meet, in
a brand new, state of the art pool. we had several very strong distance
swimmers on our team. in the team meeting the night before the meet
began, i talked to our girls and told them that we could be in first place
at the end of the first event if they all did their jobs and swam the races
they were capable of swimming. i spoke to each of our girls by name and
gave them a time to shoot for—this was in front of the entire team—and
then turned to patty, and said, “patty, if you improve your time the way
you did last summer, you may score too.” the next day patty dropped
her best time from 19:48 to 18:47! the other girls did well too, and we
were first place, ahead of the great Santa clara team, be it only for one
event.
after the first day’s final, i asked patty to come downstairs with me to
get some ice cream. when we sat down i told her, “i did say we had a
chance to get second in the 1,500, but i didn’t expect it to be you.” She
replied, with fire in her eyes, “that’s what made me so mad!” i came
right back and said, “well, you know what you should be thinking of
now, don’t you?” “no, what?” she asked. i said, “the world record for
long course is only 18:42, and you are much better long course than you
are short course.” to put all this in proper perspective patty was 13 at
the time, stood five-foot-one, and weighed 100 pounds.
that summer in the first day of a four-day meet, i entered patty in
the 1,500 (the only race of the day) with the american record holder,
carolyn house; the indoor national champion and record holder, Sharon
finneran; and the defending national champion, Ginny Dunkel. patty
went out in 4:47, her best 400 time, on the way to breaking the world
record for the 800 meters by :05, on the way to breaking the world re-
cord for the 1,500 meters by almost :15! She swam a time around 18:30,
almost two minutes faster than the summer before.
Looking back, it now seems like a daring challenge to give a 13-year-
old. Over the years i have issued several such challenges that at the time,
viewed realistically, seemed unlikely to be achieved. however, several
of these challenges were accepted by different swimmers and yielded
world-record accomplishments. these challenges became goals. what
part these challenges played in breaking world records cannot be deter-
338

--- Page 353 Text ---
Preparing to Excel in Competition
mined. there is just no way of knowing. But my philosophy is and has
always been If you don’t believe you can, you probably won’t.
after that strong first day performance, our team advanced, led by 16-
year-old Sharon Stouder, who won both the 100- and 200-meter butterfly
events with new world records. we had won our team’s first individual
national title that spring at pittsburgh, where Sharon had won the 100-
yard freestyle. Later that year, at the Olympic trials, Sharon and Jeanie
hallock took first and third, respectively, in the 100 freestyle to become
my first US Olympic team members. we had a third young lady, Sandra
nitta, who made it in the 200 breaststroke later in the trials. Sharon also
qualified first in the 100 butterfly, breaking the world record. i might
point out that i never attended a national championship myself until
1961. three years later, three of our athletes were going to the Olympic
Games in tokyo, Japan.
Sharon went on to win three gold medals in tokyo, breaking the world
record again in the 100 fly (no 200 fly for women in those Olympics)
and taking second in the 100 free with a 59.9. Sharon, just 16, became
the first american and the only woman at that time besides australian
Dawn frasier to have broken the 1:00 mark.
we had set a team goal the year before to be second in the nationals
in 1964 and to win our first team title in 1965. we accomplished both
goals. none of the many champions, world-record holders, and Olympic
medalists i’ve coached since that time have brought me more satisfaction
or meant more to me than this group of young women.
why i do i relate these war stories? i hope that they will awaken in
some of you young coaches the thought that you can accomplish the same
thing through hard work and confidence. far too many coaches fail to
see themselves as being able to accomplish great things. as one moves
further up the ladder of success, there is generally more access to top
talent. confidence and hard work will take you as far you want to go.
Making and Sticking to a Plan
where do we go from here? Looking back over the many teams i have
coached and thinking about the great swimmers who swam on those
teams as well as those who competed against us, it is clear that confi-
dence was an extremely important element in their success. “One can-
not achieve what one does not believe!” as the t-shirt slogan goes (Jack
nelson’s team wore t-shirts with this slogan). there are, of course, such
things as overconfidence and false confidence, but teams who work hard
to create and follow a plan are not likely to experience them. the way
339

--- Page 354 Text ---
Gambril
to ensure that your belief becomes reality is to make a plan and see it
through. a good plan will address mental strategy, specific training and
preparation, and even how to handle time away from the pool.
i remember my first head-coaching assignment in 1966. i was selected
to take the US Swim team to Moscow for a meet. Olive Mucha of the
Multnomah athletic club was my assistant, and Bill Lippman was the
head manager. Our team was loaded with Olympians from the 1964 team
as well as some young up-and-coming swimmers: Don Schollander, Greg
Buckingham, Dick roth, Ken Merten, John nelson, Steve rerych, Bill
Utley, ross wales, charlie hickcox, Sharon finneran, Judy hombarger,
cynthia Goyette, pam Kruse, Sue pitt, and Martha randall. we went
into the meet as underdogs. truth be known, we would not have been
invited if the russians didn’t think they could handle us!
i won’t go into details of the races here, but i will discuss the way
we approached the competition. there have been many coaches who
have influenced my own coaching; two are swim coach peter Daland
and football coach paul “Bear” Bryant. they had one thing in common.
they always approached a competition by trying to get the underdog
role; their philosophy was Never go into competition talking about
what your team can do. peter successfully used this philosophy with
the 1972 US Olympic team. coach Bryant would speak at length with
the press every year about why his talented and successful team should
not be favored in a given contest or season. i will always remember the
first football game i attended after arriving on the alabama campus as a
swim coach. the game was against cal-Berkeley, and coach Bryant did
nothing but praise Mike white and the california passing offense. he
continued right up to game time, bemoaning the bad scheduling. would
you believe we won the game 66-0?
now you must understand that when you use this technique, you
must make your own athletes understand that what they read in the pa-
pers and hear on tv is not reality, and that what is shared in your own
locker room must stay there. this was our plan from the time we got to
Moscow: to convince our opponents that we were out of shape and not
prepared to compete with the likes of Simon Blitzgimon, propopinko,
llichev, and the other great swimmers we would face. the girls especially
loved the game and talked to each other about it in the teenage language
that they knew so well—pig Latin.
the russians loved to follow Don Schollander around with a movie
camera and film everything he did from the time he got into the pool
each day. therefore Don probably swam more backstroke and breast-
stroke in warm-up than in his entire life. he hoped to give them lots of
340

--- Page 355 Text ---
Preparing to Excel in Competition
film to study!
can you imagine my position as coach to all these veterans? these
great Olympic champions, world-record holders, and national champion
swimmers had joined the squad and left their home coaches such as
George haines, Doc counsilman, and peter Daland. who was i to lead
them in such an important venture? the first thing i did, though, was
to make the athletes believe that i was in charge and that i had no doubt
about how to prepare them for their events. Olive went along with me on
this and if she, as a veteran coach, had any doubts, i never saw them.
the challenge was to prepare these great athletes for their individual
races. it was important that they have confidence in whatever they were
asked to do. in those days, there were no instructions sent by home
coaches to guide us. we planned to swim the complete Olympic sched-
ule, except relays. that meant everything from the 100-meter events to
the 1,500 (not all strokes were competed at the 100 and 200 distances
at that time). we went to poland for a few days and swam a shakedown
meet in warsaw. things went well and the lack of competition there
made the experience a good outing and a confidence builder.
we took aeroflot, the russian national plane, to Moscow. the meal
was interesting, to say the least: hot dogs with no buns, caviar, and beer!
when we arrived in Moscow, it was late at night. we went on to the hotel
younis, a bare-bones hotel with very small rooms. we all imagined that
our rooms were bugged. i’ll never forget waking up the next morning
and looking out the window at a big building on a hill with a huge red
star on top; yes, we realized, we were in russia.
Most of our training there consisted of a warm-up with broken
swims—these were designed to instill confidence in the swimmer’s own
readiness. there were no pace clocks in those days, at least not in russia;
they had just begun to be used back home. this meant that Olive and i
had to give the swimmers their sendoffs on respective broken swims. i
was working a stopwatch with each hand, the kind with sweep hands.
i was terrified that i would mess up someone’s sendoff. this didn’t hap-
pen, fortunately.
Don Schollander hurt his shoulder just sitting down on his bed. he
reached out behind him to catch himself and wrenched it. i was able to
get some rubbing alcohol—vodka?—which i mixed with olive oil and
wintergreen. the oil and wintergreen was George haines’s magic rub-
down formula. i massaged Don until the skin was about worn through,
assuring him that i would have his shoulder ready to go. (yes, i was
scared to death.) he recovered and easily won his events, as did most
everyone on the team.
341

--- Page 356 Text ---
Gambril
the trip was a great success. the US swimmers gave a great account
of themselves. in fact, they did so well that the results were not printed
in the russian newspapers. i have always wondered what people must
think when they read about a big meet coming up, as the russian citizens
did in this case, and then never see any results. the only success the
russian swimmers had was in the breaststroke event that they dominated
in those days.
i have further reason to remember the trip fondly, as my son Greg was
born just four hours after my arrival home. My wife, teddy, had sent me
on this all-important trip knowing that it would be touch and go as to
whether or not i would be back before the baby was born. (Our oldest
child, Kim, was born while i was on a destroyer in the formosa Straight
in 1957 on plane guard during the shelling of Qumoi.) this is the kind
of sacrifice that a coach’s spouse and family are routinely faced with.
this trip was no doubt a large factor in my being selected at a young age
as assistant coach to George haines for the 1968 Olympics.
the 1968 and 1972 Olympic Games were great learning experiences
in themselves. i could write chapters on each highlighting the ways
George and peter differ in their approach to preparing for the Games. it
is the similarities, though, that i think are significant. these include ap-
proaching the Games with confidence but also with sound preparation
in the pool. we had a great but lengthy training camp—a full month in
colorado Springs—before the Olympics in 1968. the feeling, probably
correct, was that the team (swimmers of the longer events, in particular)
needed that much time to prepare for the mile-high altitude in Mexico
city. Our slogan from the start was that it was not altitude that our suc-
cess depended on, but attitude!
a lot of planning also went into the off-time activities during the
month-long camp to prevent team members from being bored and
homesick, and to keep them focused on the task ahead. we scheduled
everything from mountain climbs to golf to a mixed (men’s and women’s
teams) evening of dancing and having a good time at the Junction.
Before the 1972 games, we set up the training camp at west point. Once
again the Olympic training was left to only two coaches, peter Daland
and me. the swimmers were completely cut off from outside distractions.
we did go into new york city for a Sunday tour conducted by long-time
aaU supporter Jack abramson. the team had dinner at Mama Leoni’s
restaurant, then went on to rockefeller center to see Goldie hawn in
Butterflies Are Free. i was very impressed with rick DeMont deciding,
at the age of 16, not to go with us because it was a work day. he would
not think of altering his grueling schedule for the outing! peter stayed
342

--- Page 357 Text ---
Preparing to Excel in Competition
with him.
the team trained very diligently. peter stressed in every team meet-
ing the need to keep a strong “party line”—meaning that we should be
overly cautious with the press in all interviews and should continue to
play up the strengths of our competitors.
when we arrived in Munich for the Games it was 11:00 pm. peter and
i had discussed our arrival plan. in those days, we had no athlete’s code
of behavior and had to rely on our own tactics to try to get the swimmers
to take care of themselves. we decided to check into the village and to
take the team at once to the Olympic pool for a short loosening down
workout. this was peter’s idea and was a product of his being a very ex-
perienced college coach. we knew that if we took the swimmers to their
rooms at 11:00 pm the more adventurous members of the team would be
off to town, maybe even to the famous beer gardens, that night. By going
to the pool, then back to the village, the swimmers would get to their
rooms close to the usual college bedtime of after midnight! there was
some grumbling, but as far as we know, the plan worked as intended.
the main complaint was from Steve Genter, who talked of his chest
hurting. we weren’t concerned at first, nor even over the next couple of
days as he continued to talk of pain in his chest. when he finally went
to the team doctor, they found that one of his lungs was 20 percent col-
lapsed. what causes a lung to deflate is air gets outside the lung, in the
chest cavity, thereby depressing the lung. the assumption was that the
flight and altitude had in some way caused the problem. the treatment
is to make a small incision into the intercostal area and insert a little
tube that lets the air out as the lung inflates. Steve was in the hospital
for a couple of days. he came back to practice the night before he was
to swim his first event, the 800 freestyle relay. a thoracic surgeon was
assigned to be poolside whenever Steve was to swim. to keep the story
short, Steve swam on the winning 800-meter freestyle relay, and later
in the meet swam the 200 and 400 free events, winning a silver and a
bronze. imagine the courage it took for Steve to finish what he had set
out to do in the Olympic Games.
Being a Motivator
this brings me to the 1976 Olympic team. we were up to three coaches,
but still way below the current allotment of eight men’s and eight wom-
en’s coaches for the US Olympic team. Doc counsilman was the head
coach, and George haines and myself were the assistants. what a great
position for me to be in! it was my third successive Olympic endeavor,
343

--- Page 358 Text ---
Gambril
and i had had nothing but admiration and the deepest respect for my
coaching cohorts since the beginning of my coaching career. My swim-
mers had successfully competed against teams they had coached, though,
and i considered myself equal to them as far as preparing swimmers for
top competition. that’s not to say everyone else held me in high esteem,
but i believed i could do the job, having just been involved with the two
teams that had dominated the Mexico city (1968) and Munich (1972)
Olympics, and having helped my own club teams win four national
championships. One has to have confidence when training top-level
competitors. it is also important to know the swimmers’ times and to
have knowledge of their respective competitors
the 1976 Men’s United States Olympic swim team is the most success-
ful team ever to represent this nation. the United States has the most
medals won and the most gold medals collected in Olympic history.
from the first team meeting, head coach Doc counsilman set the goal
for the team: to be the best in history. he challenged those athletes to
win every gold medal, to break as many world records as possible, and
to sweep as many events as they could. at that time, each country was
allowed three entries in each individual event.
from the start of training camp that year, things went well. Doc divided
the team among us. i was assigned the distance swimmers, the sprint
butterflyers, the sprinters, and Mike Bruner, a 200 butterflyer who was
famous for his 100  100-yard repeats, leaving on 1:00. there have been
other and yes, faster, sets but none that can truly be said to be faster rela-
tive to the times being swum at that time. George haines had the stroke
swimmers in his group settling mostly around the 200-meter distance.
no one up to that time had had more success at that distance with their
swimmers than George. now get this—Doc took the weakest, on paper,
members of the group. this included mostly individual medley swim-
mers and breaststrokers. no one could argue with the success Doc had
had with breaststrokers and iM swimmers (not to imply that he hadn’t
had success with all distances and strokes), but he gave up Jim Mont-
gomery, his own swimmer and an odds-on favorite to win three or more
gold medals, to my group, and put swimmers in George’s and my groups
who had broken world records in the trials held in Long Beach three to
four weeks earlier. Doc was clearly interested in total team success. in
most cases, the athletes in the same events were put in the same groups
and pitted against each other in training.
we had a great training camp in canton, Ohio. Doc allowed each prac-
tice to be open. the stands were packed for almost every workout. Lots
of age-group coaches in the area took advantage of the team’s training
344

--- Page 359 Text ---
Preparing to Excel in Competition
to motivate their own swimmers. John nabor held court with the young
swimmers every day at every practice. he must have been on extended
taper! it seemed that he was in the stands signing autographs long before
my distance-oriented group was out of the pool!
i must tell you that Jim Montgomery did so little in training that i went
to Doc about it. he asked me about the training Jim had done. i showed
the records to him, and he said, “that looks about right.” he was right,
the training seemed to work; Jim had outstanding success, winning the
100-meter and becoming the first in history to break 50 seconds. he
placed third in the 200, behind John nabor and the winner, Bruce fur-
ness. Matt vogel’s unorthodox training, doing untold amount of dryland
preparation on deck, also prepared him well for his upset win in the 100
butterfly. Both cases were object lessons to me, illustrating the fact that
there is more than one way to prepare and train for a race. things had
changed since 1968 when George haines and i had trained the entire
men’s team in isolation in colorado Springs for nearly one month before
going to Mexico city. at that time, we split the team and trained them
almost the entire time and had little contact with the home coach. in
the training camp prior to the 1976 games we Olympic coaches were on
the phone often with the home coaches to go over the training we were
giving the swimmers.
it would be fun to tell all the details of the training camp if space per-
mitted. Some of the highlights concern “rocket Man,” otherwise known
as Olympic breaststroke champion John henken, who built a rocket for
each team member and coach to set off at the big barbecue the town
held for us on the fourth of July. it was a fireworks extravaganza, with
John’s homemade rockets a big part of the show. evidently John was
taking classes on rockets at Stanford. he made up a three-stage rocket to
set off as we left canton. it almost went well! the problem was that as
he set it off in the parking lot, just as the bus was to depart, it began to
lean slightly. as it went into the launch, it shot off across the interstate.
fortunately it didn’t hit any cars or cause an accident and came to rest
in an electrical yard, without hitting any equipment. no harm done.
when we arrived in Montreal the security was a shock. whenever we
loaded a bus to go to a satellite pool for training, two armed guards with
automatic weapons went with us. they unloaded first, and one would run
to the rear of the bus while the other secured the front as we unloaded.
it must have seemed like overkill, or at least overprotection, except to
those of us who had been in Munich. Sitting in the Olympic village in
Munich, looking out the window at the terrorists in the next building
holding the israeli hostages is an experience we will never forget.
345

--- Page 360 Text ---
Gambril
the confidence that Doc had continually drilled into the team at train-
ing camp prevailed, and the team delivered. they took all the gold medals
but one, the 200 breaststroke won by David wilkie of Great Britain. they
were awarded 12 of 13 gold medals, 10 of 11 silver medals (two relays
were conducted; having won the gold, the silver was not available to
them), and a bronze. the 400 free relay would have been a lock, had it
been held. the squad broke eight world records and swept five events,
while placing second in five other events.
Setting an Example
Being a coach means leading the team. a coach’s decisions and actions
set an example for swimmers to believe in and to follow. the following
story is a case in point. Our most successful team at alabama placed sec-
ond in the 1977 ncaa meet to a great University of Southern california
team. at our first team meeting in September, when we were discussing
the upcoming 1977 season, i asked the team what they thought was the
highest place we could reach in the ncaa championships. after some
careful consideration of the top teams in the country, we decided to go
for second place, bowing to the powerhouse trojan team. Looking ahead
to the ncaas, we did not shave seven individuals for the Sec meet and
lost by around 70 points to tennessee. we won nine events, but lost on
depth. this was a tough decision, seeing as how alabama had never
won the conference meet and likely could have that year (certainly if we
could place second at the ncaas to USc, we could win the conference
meet). But we were focusing on the bigger goal.
when our time came at ncaas, we did achieve our goal. when cap-
tains Jonty Skinner and Monty Daily picked up our second-place trophy,
we knew that we had had our ultimate season. having freshman casey
converse upset Steve Shaw in the 1,650 and become the first to go under
15:00 added a great deal to the team’s sense of accomplishment.
all programs are limited only by the imagination of the coach, the
level of talent on the team, and the squad’s motivation and confidence.
there are other things that sometimes make success easier: adequate
funds, good facilities, strong support, and so forth. none of these, in my
mind, will have much effect without a dedicated, confident, motivated,
and visionary coach.
Summary
• Swimming is an exceptionally demanding sport in terms of the time
346

--- Page 361 Text ---
Preparing to Excel in Competition
involved in both swim and dryland training.
• the most important goal for swimmers is to swim their fastest in
the most important meets of the season.
• the greatest measure of a coach is how well his or her athletes
perform in championship competition.
• Success comes from confidence in oneself and in the program.
• the training program is only as important as the motivation provided
by the coach.
• confidence is essential for success, but hard work must be the foun-
dation of that confidence.
• Be specific in establishing goals and believe that you and your team
can accomplish them.
• take the “underdog” approach when going into competition.
• communicate and sell the team plan to athletes preparing for com-
petition.
• commitment can help swimmers rise above even major adversity.
• Set the example and be consistent.
• evaluate your plan at the end of the season and use it as a basis for
a future plan.
347

--- Page 363 Text ---
About the Contributors
about the editors
Dick Hannula is one of the winningest high
school and club coaches in the history of
swimming. While serving as the boys’ swim-
ming coach at Wilson High School in Tacoma,
Washington, from 1959 to 1983, Hannula
racked up the longest high school undefeated
streak on record, winning 323 consecutive
meets without a loss including 24 consecutive
boys’ Washington state high school swimming
championships.
Hannula is a former multiple-term president
of the American Swimming Coaches Associa-
tion and currently a vice president of the World Swim Coaches Asso-
ciation. He has been inducted into the International Swimming Hall of
Fame. Hannula is the author of another Human Kinetics book, Coaching
Swimming Successfully. He resides in Tacoma, Washington.
Nort Thornton is the head men’s swimming
coach at the University of California at Berke-
ley. Thornton’s Cal teams have consistently
finished in the top 10 in the nation over the
past 30 years. Thornton has coached Cal to
two NCAA Championships and was named
the NCAA Coach of the Year in 1979 and 1980.
An inductee into the International Swimming
Hall of Fame, he has coached the US national
team at the Olympics and Pan-American
Games. He has also served the swimming
community as the president of the American
Swimming Coaches Association.
349

--- Page 364 Text ---
About the Editors
about the
CONtributors
Jack Bauerle has been women’s coach at Georgia since 1979 and men’s
coach since 1983 and is the SEC’s all-time
winningest swim coach with 302 dual meet
victories. He has led the Lady Bulldogs to
three consecutive NCAA championships (1999
through 2001), and he has elevated the Bulldogs
men to a perennial top 10 team. During his ten-
ure, Bauerle has coached 130 All-Americans, 17
NCAA individual champions and three relays
champions, and 11 US Olympic swimmers. Of
his swimmers, 33 have been awarded Academic
All-America status and 14 awarded NCAA
postgraduate scholarships. Bauerle is a three-time NCAA Coach of the
Year and a nine-time Southeastern Conference Coach of the Year. He also
served as the head US women’s coach for 1997 World University Games
and assistant women’s coach at the 2000 Olympics. As a swimmer, he was
a four-year letter winner at Georgia (1970-1974), a team co-captain, and a
three-time school record holder.
Michael Bottom is the co-head swim coach at
the University of California at Berkeley and
is regarded as one of the world’s top sprint
coaches, having coached three of the top five
sprint performers in 2000—Anthony Ervin and
Gary Hall Jr. of the United States and Bart Ki-
zierowski of Poland. All three swimmers made
the finals at the 2000 games and for the first
time in Olympic history, two men—Ervin and
Hall—tied for the gold medal. In all, Michael’s
sprinters won six Olympic medals at the 2000
games, more than any other US men’s Olympic coach. In January 2001,
another of Michael’s swimmers, Gordon Kozulj from Croatia, broke the
350

--- Page 365 Text ---
About the Contributors
world record in the short-course 200-meter backstroke. Bottom graduated
with the Scholar-Athlete award and a bachelor’s degree in psychology
from the University of Southern California. He earned a master’s degree in
counseling at Auburn. As a swimmer, Michael was a member of the 1980
Olympic team, a member of a world record-setting 4  100 freestyle relay,
and part of three NCAA Championship teams at USC.
Peter Daland was the head coach at the Uni-
versity of Southern California from 1958 to
1992, where he led his team to nine NCAA
Team Championships (the second most in
NCAA history), 12 second-place NCAA team
finishes, and 93 NCAA individual and relay
titles. He also won 17 national AAU titles (15
men’s titles at USC and 2 women’s titles at
the L.A. Athletic Club). His dual meet record
was unparalleled: 318-31-1 (.917) in 35 sea-
sons. USC went undefeated in dual meets in
20 seasons, including 1990-91 and 1989-90, and his 1977 team might
have been the finest collegiate swim team ever. Among the world-class
swimmers he coached are John Naber, winner of 4 Olympic gold medals
and 10 NCAA titles; American-record holders Dave Wharton and Mike
O’Brien; and Olympic stars Roy Saari, Murray Rose, Jeff Float, Joe and
Mike Bottom, and Bruce and Steve Furniss. He was appointed women’s
US Olympic head coach in 1964 and men’s US Olympic head coach in
1972. In 1977 he was inducted into the International Swimming Hall of
Fame. A cofounder and editor of Swimming World and founder, editor,
and publisher of Junior Swimmer, Daland also served as president of the
American Swim Coaches Association from 1993 to 1994 and vice presi-
dent of the World Swim Coaches Association President from 1968 to 1970
and again from 1994 to 1998. Now retired, Daland is working on several
books chronicling the history of swimming, and he coaches the masters
swim team at the Daland Swim School.
University of Arizona associate coach Rick De-
Mont specializes in coaching sprint training.
Since joining the UA program in 1988, he has
coached several USS and NCAA individual
and relay national champions. A two-year
and eight-time All-American at UA, DeMont
swam for the Wildcats from 1977 to 1979. He
is a former world-record holder in the 1500-
meter and 400-meter freestyle events and the
351

--- Page 366 Text ---
About the Contributors
4  100 free relay. He has collected numerous titles, including national,
Pan American, world, and Olympic champion. He was the first man in
history to swim the 400-meter freestyle in less than four minutes and
is credited with pioneering negative split swimming. DeMont has been
inducted into the University of Arizona Athletic Hall of Fame and the
International Swimming Hall of Fame. He is also an artist and has had
his paintings shown in local and national
galleries.
Since 1973 Jean Freeman has built a competitive
swimming and diving program at the University
of Minnesota, placing at the NCAA champion-
ships in each year since 1986. A three-time Big
Ten Coach of the Year, Freeman has coached
60 swimmers to All-American status 169 times.
More than 100 swimmers have garnered All-Big
Ten honors, and 92 Minnesota Gophers have
received academic All-Big Ten honors with
13 student athletes named academic All-Americans. Freeman’s coaching
philosophy centers on a total person concept, in which academics are em-
phasized as much as athletics. For the last decade, the Gophers have been
involved with community service programs and the squad has works with
the younger swimmers of the local age-group USS teams. A graduate of
the University of Minnesota, Freeman was a member of the swimming and
diving team from 1968 to 1972. She has been named to Team Speedo—an
advisory board for swimming and diving—and to the board of the College
Swim Coaches Association (CSCA). She also received an award from the
CSCA in recognition of over 15 years of excellence in college coaching and
service to the coaching association. She has been
inducted into the Minnesota Swim Coaches As-
sociation Hall of Fame.
Doug Frost is the coach of Ian Thorpe, world-
record holder in the 200-meter, 400-meter, and
800-meter freestyles. Frost has been bestowed
the honor of life member of the Australian Swim
Coaches Association (New South Wales) and
the Padstow Swim Club, where he served as
head coach from 1978 to 1997. He has coached
on the Australian national teams at the 1995,
1997, and 1999 Pan-Pacific Games; 1998 World Championships team and
Commonwealth Games team and the Sydney 2000 Olympic team. He has
served as director of the Australian Swim Coaches Association since 1989
352

--- Page 367 Text ---
About the Contributors
and the Doug Frost Swim School since 1978. He
is currently the elite coach responsible for the
national team at Sutherland Leisure Center on
the south side of Sydney, Australia.
Five-time US Olympic swim coach Don Gam-
bril has long been recognized as one of the na-
tion’s finest, coaching such swimmers as Mark
Spitz, Jon Olsen, John Naber, Matt Biondi,
Nancy Hogshead, and Mary T. Meagher. In all,
his own team swimmers have held more than
20 world records and 14 Olympic gold medals and his teams garnered
a 351-58 overall combined career mark. During his time as head coach
of the University of Alabama (17 years with the men’s team and 11 with
the women’s team), 15 of his men’s teams and 5 of his women’s teams
finished in the top 10 nationally with 114 of his swimmers receiving All-
American honors. A three-time Southeastern Conference Men’s Coach
of the Year, Gambril was inducted into the International Swimming Hall
of Fame and given the United States Swimming Award in 1983. He is in
nine swimming halls of fame. He was also named ASCA Coach of the
Year before retiring after the 1990 season and handing the torch to his
first NCAA champion, Jonty Skinner.
Shane Gould held every women’s freestyle world record from the 100 to the
1500 meters, as well as in the 200-meter individual medley, in September
1972. At the Munich Olympics that year she won five individual Olympic
swimming medals—three gold, one silver, and one bronze. Throughout her
swimming career she has held 11 world records, 21 Australian records,
and 13 Australian national titles. In 2000 she
set five masters records. Shane hosts a coaching
information Web site at www.swimmingcoa-
chonline.com as well as a personal Web site at
www.shanegould.com.au.
Dick Jochums has been head coach at Santa
Clara Swim Club since 1996. A veteran coach
at the collegiate, swim school, and USS club
levels, he has held assistant coaching positions
at the University of Washington and University
of California at Berkeley, and head coaching positions at Cal State Hayward,
Concord Swim Club (today the Terrapin Swim Club), Long Beach State,
and the University of Arizona. In his 20-year collegiate coaching career,
his teams earned 12 top-10 NCAA finishes. His club programs have won
353

--- Page 368 Text ---
About the Contributors
5 national titles and were always in the top 10 with 18 top-5 finishes. At
Santa Clara, he has coached the club to three summer long-course men’s
national championship titles from 1996 through
1998. He has trained a number of Olympians, 12
Olympic medalists, 25 world-record holders, 60
American-record holders, and 7 NCAA-record
holders. Dick holds a doctorate of education
from the University of California at Berkeley.
As head coach of Stanford University men’s
swimming since 1979, Skip Kenney has led
the Cardinal team to seven NCAA titles and
has been named NCAA Coach of the Year six
times. His team’s 1998 NCAA performance
ranks as one of the finest in the history of the meet with Stanford hav-
ing a representative in every individual and relay event championship
final. His Stanford athletes have won 60 individual NCAA titles, includ-
ing 11 by Pablo Morales. Kenney has guided the Cardinal team to 20
consecutive Pac-10 conference titles, breaking John Wooden’s record
for consecutive Pac-10 championships in any sport. Kenney has been
named Pac-10 Coach of the Year 13 times in the last 17 years. He has
served as head coach of the United States
Olympic men’s swimming team (1996) and
was an assistant coach at both the 1984 and
1988 Summer Olympics. He has also served
as US national team coach at countless other
World Championships, Pan-American Games,
and Pan-Pacific Championships.
John Leonard has been executive director of
American Swim Coaches Association (ASCA)
since January 1985. In this position he has over-
seen the creation of the certification program for
coaches, the development of the SwimAmerica Learn to Swim program, the
implementation of the first-ever coaches code of ethics, and a membership
growth from 1,100 to over 5,200. He serves on the Olympic International
Operations Committee and the International Relations Committee at USA
Swimming among other ad hoc committees. He is a founding officer of
the World Swimming Coaches Association (WSCA) and continues on the
board of directors with the WSCA. He travels extensively to swim clinics
and meets around the world on behalf of ASCA and is actively involved
in reform of Olympic governance and anti-doping activities of both ASCA
and WSCA. In 1996 he was given the Athletes Appreciation award from
354

--- Page 369 Text ---
About the Contributors
USA Swimming’s Athletes Committee for his work in anti-doping. Before
assuming the ASCA post in 1985, he was regarded as one of the most
successful club coaches in the United States. He has coached more than
120 high school and collegiate All-American swimmers, 2 NCAA Cham-
pionship divers, dominant state championship teams in New York and
Illinois, more than 70 Senior National qualifiers and place winners, 18
USA Olympic Trials qualifiers, and 1 Olympian. He has worked in every
Olympic Games since 1984. Leonard has con-
sulted with more than 390 American swimming
clubs ranging from national championship
teams to developmental teams. He currently
owns a club of more than 250 swimmers and 6
coaches in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. In August
2001 he will lead the USA Universiade team
into Beijing, China.
Since he became head coach in 1990, David
Marsh has reestablished the Auburn Univer-
sity swim program as one of the top programs
in the country. His men’s program has garnered two national titles, five
Southeastern Conference titles, and six top-10 NCAA finishes. His wom-
en’s program has had seven runner-up SEC finishes and twice has finished
in the top 10 nationally. Marsh’s teams have earned 596 All-America
honors by 83 swimmers, along with 42 NCAA individual titles and 127
SEC individual titles. He has coached five Olympic medalists, including
gold medalists Scott Tucker and John Hargis.
In 42 events, 23 Auburn swimmers have won
medals internationally. Marsh is a three-time
NCAA Men’s Coach of the Year and a multiple
SEC Coach of the Year. He served as an assis-
tant coach of the 1996 and 2000 US Olympic
and 1999 Pan Pacific teams. A five-time All-
American backstroker at Auburn, Marsh was
ranked sixth in the world in 1980.
Originally trained as a physical education
teacher, Bruce R. Mason also holds a degree
in mathematics from the University of Sydney and completed his PhD
in biomechanics from the University of Oregon in 1980. He served sev-
eral years as a lecturer in biomechanics at the University of Wollongong
before being appointed the head of the biomechanics department at the
Australian Institute of Sport in 1982. Since 1994, Bruce has concentrated
his professional efforts in providing a biomechanical service to elite
355

--- Page 370 Text ---
About the Contributors
Pablo Morales, 1992 Olympic gold medalist
and two-time former world record holder in the
100-meter butterfly, is one of the most highly
acclaimed swimmers of the 1980s and 1990s.
At the 1984 Olympic games, he earned gold
in the 4  100 medley relay and two silvers in
the 100 meter fly and 200 meter IM. At Stan-
ford University, Morales was the most prolific
male swimmer in collegiate history, winning 11
NCAA titles and leading the Cardinals to three
straight NCAA championships. A Stanford Aca-
demic All-American in his senior year, Morales holds a law degree from
Cornell. He returned to swimming as assistant men’s coach at Stanford for
the 1997-98 season, was women’s head coach at San Jose State University
from 1998-2001, and is now women’s head coach at University of Nebraska.
Morales is a 1998 International Swimming Hall of Fame inductee, was
named Swimmer of the Year in 1984, USOC Male Athlete of the Year and
Sullivan Award finalist in 1992, and was inducted into the International
Swimming Hall of Fame in 1998.
Richard Quick is head women’s swim coach
at Stanford University and has served as a
coach of the US Olympic team for the past five
Olympiads. At the 2000 Olympics, Quick led
the women’s team to 16 medals, seven of which
were gold. In his 24 years as a collegiate head
coach, Quick has compiled an overall dual meet
record of 178-33 (.844), capturing 12 of the
last 17 NCAA titles and 17 conference crowns.
Since 1988, Quick has guided Stanford to seven
NCAA championships—and 11 of 12 Pac-10 Conference crowns. In the
five years under Quick’s coaching in which Stanford has not claimed the
national title, the Cardinals have recorded either second- or third-place
finishes. He has lost only four dual meets while at Stanford, sporting an
89-4 dual record mark (.957) while coaching 73 All-Americans to 611
All-America honors. In addition, Quick has helped develop 35 NCAA
champions at Stanford who have captured 50 NCAA individual and 25
relay titles. Along the way, he has picked up five NCAA Coach of the Year
honors and three Pac-10 Coach of the Year awards. Quick has continued
to coach 1995 Stanford graduate Jenny Thompson, the most decorated
female swimmer in the history of the Olympics, who brought home a total
of eight gold medals throughout her career. He also coached Dara Torres,
who at 34 came out of a seven-year retirement to swim in her record fourth
356

--- Page 371 Text ---
About the Contributors
swimmers in Australia and has published and
presented extensively on the subject of the
biomechanics of swimming. He is a director
in the International Society of Biomechanics
in Sports (ISBS) and at the ISBS 2000 Confer-
ence was named the Geoffrey Dyson Memorial
Lecturer in recognition of his service of ap-
plying biomechanics to performance in elite
swimming.
Former US Olympic coach and ASCA National
Coach of the Year Eddie Reese has coached at the University of Texas
since 1979. Reese’s Longhorns captured the 2001 NCAA Championship
title—their eighth under Reese’s tenure—and have won 7 of the last 13
NCAA Championships and an incredible 22 consecutive conference titles.
Reese had five of his swimmers (Ian Crocker, Nate Dusing, Scott Goldb-
latt, Tommy Hannan, and Jamie Rauch) as well as three former Longhorns
(Josh Davis, Gary Hall Jr., and Neil Walker) swim for the United States at
the 2000 Sydney Olympics—accounting for one-fourth of the entire USA
swim team. Since his initial campaign at Texas in 1979 when the Longhorns
finished second in the Southwest Conference (SWC) and 21st nationally,
Reese’s teams have won every conference title (22) and have never fin-
ished lower than fifth at the national meet. Reese has coached 31 NCAA
individual champions, 29 national champion relays, 124 All-Americans,
and 18 Olympians, 6 of whom have claimed 18
gold medals in five Olympiads. Reese’s ability
to technically train his athletes has been a big
part of his success, but his unique approach to
swimming and training may be his best attribute.
As a swimmer in his native Florida, Reese won
two state championships in the 200-meter IM.
He was also a standout swimmer at the Univer-
sity of Florida where he helped lead the Gators
to three SEC titles.
Randy Reese coaches at Circle C Swim Club in Austin, Texas, where he
attracts swimmers from all over the world, including 2000 US Olympian
Josh Davis. Before coaching at Circle C, Reese was the head coach at the
University of Florida for 14 years, where he was known for his innovative
theories on training and nutrition as well as his winning record. Under
Reese’s direction, the men’s team at Florida captured 2 NCAA titles, 7
SEC titles, and 51 All-Americans with almost 200 All-American honors.
The women’s team earned an NCAA and an AIAW title, 8 SEC titles,
357

--- Page 372 Text ---
About the Contributors
and held a 95 percent win record. While at
Florida, Reese earned NCAA Women’s Coach
of the Year twice (1982 and 1988) and NCAA
Men’s NCAA Coach of the Year twice (1984
and 1985). He also was selected as assistant
coach of the 1980, 1984, and 1988 US Olympic
teams. Overall, Reese has produced more than
40 Olympic swimmers, including 34 medal
winners with 18 gold, 7 silver, and 9 bronze
medals among them. Reese serves as chair-
man of the board of Systems Go International,
which markets the sport drink GO!
Bill Rose has coached the Mission Viejo Nadadores Club in California since
1992. A former coach of the Canadian Dolphin Team of Vancouver and
women’s team at Arizona State University, Rose has served as US national
team coach in international competition and as head coach of the Canadian
Pan-American women’s team, the Canadian World Championship team,
and the Canadian Commonwealth team. After a successful 10-year stint as
vice president with Dean Witter and Prudential Bache, Rose returned to
his first love, coaching, joining the Nadadores and leading them to seven
Junior National Championships. Rose served as head coach for the US team
at the 1999 World University Games and the Mexican team at the 2000
Olympics and coached six international 2000 Olympic qualifiers including
silver medalist Chad Carvin.
Since becoming head coach at Irvine Nova Swim Club in California in 1990,
David Salo has seen his team win countless age group, junior national
team, and US National Championships. Salo has also coached several
individual swimmers to the US national team.
He coached 1996 Olympic medalist Amanda
Beard and four swimmers to the 2000 Games
as well—Aaron Peirsol, Jason Lezak, Gabri-
elle Rose, and Staciana Stitts—who together
brought home five medals. Salo served as as-
sistant coach for the US women’s team in the
1999 Pan American Games as well as the 2000
Olympic Games and was recently appointed
by USA Swimming to head the men’s team at
the Goodwill Games in 2001. Salo holds a PhD
from the University of Southern California, where he also served as an
assistant coach to the legendary Peter Daland in the 1980s.
358

--- Page 373 Text ---
About the Contributors
Dick Shoulberg has been aquatic director and head coach of German-
town Academy, a private instructional day school in the Philadelphia
area, since 1969. A self-described grassroots coach, he trains his team
primarily in a 6-lane, 25-yard pool. Shoulberg has coached a 400-meter
IM swimmer to a berth on the US Olympic team in five of the last six
Olympics and has had athletes make the US
Olympic team in the 100-meter backstroke,
200-meter IM, and the 200-, 400-, and 1500-
meter freestyle events. He has coached a high
schooler to 20.01 in the 50-meter freestyle and
his girls’ 400-meter freestyle relay held the
national prep record for 11 years. His boys’
400-meter freestyle relay held the national age
group record for 17- to 18-year-olds. A high
school and prep school swimmer himself,
Shoulberg has also coached at the Norristown
YWCA, Roxborough YMCA, and the Mermaid Swim Club in Blue Bell,
Pennsylvania. He and his wife, Molly, live near Valley Forge, Pennsyl-
vania, and have four children.
Deryk Snelling served as Canadian Olympic coach from 1972 to 1996
and founded the first National Centre for Swimming in Canada. He
has coached 60 swimmers to nine Olympic Games from 1964 to 1996.
Of these swimmers, 21 have earned Olympic medals, including Mark
Tewksbury, who won an Olympic gold medal in the 100-meter back-
stroke in 1992. Snelling has coached 10 ath-
letes to World Championship medals and 7
to world-record performances. From 1996 to
2000 Snelling served as the first national per-
formance director of swimming for the Ama-
teur Swimming Federation of Great Britain.
During his tenure there, Great Britain became
known as the fastest-improving swimming
nation in the world. At the developmental
level Snelling has been an innovator of many
Canadian national policies on coaching and
has been instrumental in developing the Canadian Coaching Certifica-
tion Program. He has been a member of the Canadian Swim Coaches
Association for more than 20 years.
Four-time Olympic star Jill Sterkel has served as head women’s coach
at the University of Texas since 1991, where she has directed the Long-
horns to three top-3 team finishes at the NCAA Championships and four
359

--- Page 374 Text ---
About the Contributors
others in the top-10, six conference titles, and two runner-up conference
finishes. Sterkel has coached two Olympians, three NCAA individual
champions, and numerous All-Americans and has twice been named
Big 12 Conference Women’s Swimming Coach of the Year. An inductee
of the National High School Sports Hall of Fame and Texas Women’s
Athletics Hall of Honor, Sterkel made her own Olympic swimming
debut at the age of 15 at the 1976 Olympic Games and claimed her first
gold as a member of the US 4  100-meter relay team. Her second gold
came in that same event at the 1984 Olympics. The three-time Olympic
team captain capped off her incredible career by winning two bronze
medals (in the 50-meter free and 4  100-meter free relay) at the 1988
Olympics. As a collegiate swimmer, she claimed 16 individual national
titles. She was recognized as the nation’s College Female Athlete of the
Year in 1981 and twice earned honors as the National Women’s Swim-
mer of the Year. Her school record of 53.10 in the 100-yard butterfly, set
in 1981, still stands as the best in University of Texas history.
Bill Sweetenham has led the Australian swim team at four Olympic
Games and five Commonwealth Games appearances. As the head swim-
ming coach at the Australian Institute of Sport from the late 1980s to
1994, he coached 15 Olympians, with 63 of his swimmers earning spots
on the national open team. As the National Youth Coach for Australian
Swimming from 1995 to 2000, Sweetenham coached up-and-coming
swimmers in preparation for the 2000 Games. Since December 2000 he
has served as the national performance director of Great Britain. Through
the course of his career he has worked with nine world-record holders
in long-course and short-course events. He considers his best coach-
ing effort to date placing nine swimmers on the 1989 Pan-Pacific team
with a 100 percent strike rate for improved heats to final performances
and 100 percent personal best times. Sweetenham continues to lecture,
publish, and conduct clinics worldwide on a variety of coaching and
swimming subjects.
John Trembley’s accomplishments as coach at the University of Tennessee
have included a winning record of 90 percent including an 89 percent vic-
tory rate in the tough Southeastern Conference (SEC). His team has secured
11 top-10 national finishes and two SEC team championships, and his entire
team has earned Academic All-American status 5 times. He has coached
swimmers to 45 SEC individual championships, no less than 77 school
records, three American records, and 51 of his swimmers have earned 206
All-American honors. He has coached 14 Olympians, who between them
have set a total of six world records and brought home seven Olympic golds.
Trembley has been honored for his success as a swimming coach with the
360

--- Page 375 Text ---
About the Contributors
prestigious NCAA Silver Anniversary Award,
honoring former student-athletes who have dis-
tinguished themselves in their chosen fields 25
years after their graduation from college. During
his own All-American career at Tennessee, he
was a member of nine NCAA championship ef-
forts and set American records in the 50 freestyle
and 200 and 400 freestyle relays. He was the first
swimmer in the history of the NCAA to win five
gold medals at one championship. Trembley
was inducted into the Tennessee Swimming
Hall of Fame in 1985. He is the founder and president of United Swimming
Clinics, a summer swim program that has helped more than 13,000 young
athletes worldwide.
Jon Urbanchek has been at the helm of the University of Michigan
men’s swimming program since 1982 and led the team to an NCAA
Championship in 1995. It was Michigan’s 11th such title, tying them
with Ohio State for the national record. Urbanchek has coached 9 relay
NCAA champions and 6 NCAA individual champions, and 25 of his
swimmers have made Olympic teams. Urbanchek has been honored
as NCAA Coach of the Year, has been twice named Coach of the Year
by the American Swim Coaches Association, and has been named Big
361

--- Page 376 Text ---
You’ll find
other outstanding
swimming resources at
www.humankinetics.
In the U.S. call
1-800-747-4457
Australia ...............................08 8277 1555
Canada ..............................1-800-465-7301
Europe ......................+44 (0) 113 278 1708
New Zealand ..........................09-523-3462
HUMAN KINETICS
The Premier Publisher in Sports and Fitness
P.O. Box 5076 • Champaign, IL 61825-5076 USA

--- OCR from Page 376 Image 1 ---
other out
swimming resc

In the U.S. call
1-800-747-4.

AUStralia.....ccccescesesseeeseeeees 08 8
Canada .......csceessseereeeeees 1-800-
EULODG....eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees +44 (0) 113
New Zealand..........ccceseee 09-